---
author: joshrule
date: '2010-10-06 16:08:32'
layout: post
slug: great-by-design
status: publish
title: Great by Design
wordpress_id: '16'
categories:
- effectiveness
---

![image from fullchisel.com][1]

Saws are not hammers. Hammers are not saws. If I took an 18oz. framer's hammer
and tried to use it instead of a cross-cut saw to cut a board in half, I might
succeed. But, after working much harder than would be necessary with a saw,
the ends of those two boards would be mangled. They would be crushed and
splintered, and the board would probably be cracked along the grain as well;
the results would be pitifully subpar. Why? Things work best when they are
used as they were designed to be used. Hammers were designed for driving nails
and not for cutting boards. If we were to use the same hammer to drive a few
nails, we would see beautiful results, superior to just about any other hand
tool out there.

Like hammers and saws, humans are designed for something as well. We are
designed to do great work. We have some of the most intricate and complex
hardware and software that we know of, and it's usually capable of far more
than we ask of it. My dad tells a story of a kid who grew up in his
neighborhood. The kid wasn't very athletic, but he wanted to play major league
baseball one day. So, he and his father worked out every day, all year, every
year, pushing toward something far bigger and greater than most of the kids in
the neighborhood. And... the kid played in the majors. He wasn't a star, but
he did something great. He played Major League Baseball.

If we were all living up to our design potential, we would probably be doing
something great as well. In fact, we wouldn't really call it great work
anymore. It would just be the sort of work that everyone does. But, most of
us, myself included, are a long way from routinely producing great work. We
may rarely have an insightful thought or occasionally get lucky while randomly
fiddling with something, but greatness is anything but routine for most
people. We are moderately effective, sure, but surprising, ridiculous
effectiveness is just a glimmering beacon in the distance.

It would be comforting to say that our lack of greatness is due to
environmental constraints. We would be great, but we didn't have the right
parents, haven't found our passion, or just plain aren't capable of being
great at anything. Excuses are great in helping us to rationalize our current
position, but the truth is, if you can read this, you can still do something
great. Perfect circumstances may make doing something great easier, but they
don't make it possible.

If it's possible, then why do so few people really get out there and do great
work? There are all sorts of reasons, but one of the most powerful is [one
recently discussed][2] at LessWrong. There are many more ways to be
ineffective than there are to be effective. And of all the ways to be
effective, only a few demonstrate greatness. So, in the space of all the
possible things we could do and all the possible goals we could have, only a
minuscule number actually land us at greatness.

As if that weren't enough, many of us, including me, have gone about trying to
be great pretty randomly. Well, trying to randomly choose a path to greatness
out of an infinite number of paths leading to mediocrity doesn't give us great
odds. It shouldn't be any surprise, then, that after a time of striking out
randomly, we don't have much to show for it. That's pretty demoralizing, so we
decide to shoot for something a little less than great. We try fun, efficient,
hard-working, comfortable, or any number of good things. But, we give up on
the best thing. We give up on doing a great thing, on making the world better
by being the people we were designed to be by our unique genetics and
experiences. Let me repeat that, because it is perhaps the most important idea
in this post. When we aim for doing less than great work, we rob the world of
the people we were designed to be and give it something less valuable in
return.

Greatness is possible, though. It's just that randomness isn't going to get us
there. If we want to be great, we need to be a bit more strategic about
heading in that direction. We need to develop the right mental habits and the
right way of looking at the world. In short, we need to discover how we, as
human beings and as individuals, work best.

Way of the Scholar exists for that very reason. It's here to discover the
strategies necessary for doing great work. Specifically, Way of the Scholar
tries to embrace things that help and avoid things that hurt those dedicated
to doing great research. I am just starting this journey, but you are welcome
to join me as I try to figure out exactly what sorts of things make great
academics such effective world changers.

Again, we are designed as humans to do great work, but the path to great work
takes great dedication and singleness of mind. Randomness just won't get us
there.

[1]: /a/2010-10-06-great-by-design/moxon-whip-saw1.png (image from fullchisel.com)
[2]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/2p5/humans_are_not_automatically_strategic/
