---
author: joshrule
date: '2010-12-02 16:05:08'
layout: post
slug: reading-as-apprenticeship
status: publish
title: Reading as Apprenticeship
wordpress_id: '63'
categories:
- strategy
---

![chain-links from MyTudut on flickr.com][1]

Monday, [I suggested][2] that beginning scientists should apprentice under an
already established scientist to learn the mechanics of doing science. I'm
excited about today's post, because I've been thinking about how you can take
on more than one apprenticeship at a time… by reading! A great deal of science
has been written down, and some of it has been written very well. Today, I'll
focus on how we can use those well-written pieces to apprentice under the
greatest scientists of all time: dead or alive[^1].

#### Reading as Apprenticing

Today's post boils down to one sentence: **reading can be a form of
apprenticeship**.

In the excellent _How to Read a Book_, Mortimer J. Adler argues that reading
the right books can illustrate a way of thinking, rather than simply a body of
facts. Good authors lead us through an argument step by step, making obvious
the clearest [connections][3] between ideas and openly noting the limitations
of their arguments. When we internalize this type of writing, we make the
author's ideas our own and can approach them on equal ground[^2]. We become
like them, even if only in these few ideas.

One of the simply fantastic conclusions we should draw from Adler's argument
is that we can use the best writing of scientists who did great work to see
the world as they did! By wrestling through their work, we can reforge the
chains of thought that led them to their questions and solutions. That's not
to say simply reading the books will make us better scientists. They're no
silver bullet. But, if we use them as a scaffolding to guide our thinking, we
can interact with the greatest scientists of all time and become better
scientists ourselves.

Several of my friends have recommended that I read everything an author has
written to get a better understanding of that author's entire outlook on life.
I've come close several times, and it's been very helpful (but, I always
choose authors who've written too many hard-to-find books!). Worldviews rarely
make sense unless considered holistically. The implication for us as
scientists is that we will usually profit more from studying several works by
the same author than the same number from as many authors. The more we study
the thoughts of a single person, the more we understand how they approached
their scientific work. We can get a deeper sense for how they judged the
importance of one topic over another, or how they saw several topics as being
related where others hadn't before. We can use the works to trace the
development of a scientist's thoughts over time, and see how good, early
questions led to fruitful and significant results even years later.

Do we have any evidence that the celebrated scientists themselves actually
tried this sort of thing? Actually, Richard Hamming explicitly talks about
[retracing the mindset][4] of famous scientists as they made their big
discoveries. He ended up being one of the most important computer scientists
and applied mathematicians of the twentieth century. Moreover, I'm willing to
bet that if you ask nearly any scientist to name their most significant
scientific influences, they'll name at least one person they've never met.
Reading the work of others with an eye for _how they worked as scientists_ is
a powerful strategy for apprenticing under the greatest minds of all time.

#### But…

Not all writing, even by well-known scientists, is fit for apprenticeship by
reading. Use writing that shows you how the author draws conclusions or
arrives at new hypotheses. And, find something with ideas big enough to mull
over and provoke you to change. You don't want a dry body of facts lacking a
central narrative, or something which is so general and accessible that it's
skips tough questions, interesting math, or experimental insights.

Note, too, that not all styles of reading are helpful here. Reading as
apprenticeship requires that you understand not just the material presented,
but the mind behind the writing. The specific question or solution presented
is less relevant than the process by which the scientist arrived at that
question or solution. It's not the facts, but the structure that is most
interesting to us for apprenticeship. Skimming, reading distractedly, or even
trying to read quickly won't work. When I'm reading this way, I go very
slowly, asking myself lots of questions, while writing and doodling
significantly.

Also, as effective as apprenticeship by reading may be, it is no substitute
for real, physical apprenticeship. It merely augments it. Writing is
thoroughly cleaned before reaching the public eye. Actually doing science is a
messy process rife with false starts and embarrassing mistakes. Much of that
is cut from written accounts to make the results and the scientists themselves
seem more impressive. Physically observing and interacting with working
scientists on a daily basis will generally help your own development as a
scientist far more than the same time spent with a book.

This post may seem to be a repeat of what I've said before about my current
30-day trial, but it's not. The 30-day trial is about building a body of basic
concepts, along with a few of the major insights in the field of neuroscience
(or whatever field you may study). I want to understand why my field exists
and what it's discovered already. What I'm saying today, though, is that we
can study some of the best works of science throughout history to understand
the process, mental bearing, and worldview needed to do great science. This
sort of apprenticeship is less about our field in particular, and more about
the discipline of science as a whole.

The idea tying both apprenticeship and reading of all kinds together is '[one
good thief is worth ten good scholars][5]'. We want to do as much as possible
with as little effort as possible. That is the kind of laziness scientists
should continually promote. Apprenticeship, whether through reading or through
physically working alongside a master scientist, is one of the most potent
ways we can be both a good thief and a good scholar.


[^1]: We can take on many actual apprenticeships over the course of a lifetime, and in fact, it would probably be wise to regularly seek out new mentors and master scientists. But, I strongly recommend that you stick to one primary apprenticeship at any one time. I thought about splitting my time between several labs when I first arrived in VA, but quickly decided against it. You cannot serve two masters, no matter how interesting both may seem. Good science is hard work that takes significant effort. It's not really something you do once or twice a week after your yoga class.
[^2]: That doesn't mean we necessarily agree with the author. We can accept or reject their arguments. But, those arguments are now part of our repertoire. We can defend or attack them at will.

[1]: /a/2010-12-02-reading-as-apprenticeship/chain-links.png (chain-links from MyTudut on flickr.com)
[2]: http://joshrule.com/blog/apprenticeship-get-started-in-science/ (WOTS - Apprenticeship: Get Started in Science)
[3]: http://joshrule.com/blog/trial1day15/ (WOTS - Trial 1: Day 15)
[4]: http://www.dartmouth.edu/~matc/MathDrama/reading/Hamming.html (The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics)
[5]: http://joshrule.com/blog/one-good-thief-is-worth-ten-good-scholars/ (WOTS - One Good Thief is Worth Ten Good Scholars)
