---
author: joshrule
date: '2010-11-15 17:40:49'
layout: post
slug: walk-before-you-run
status: publish
title: Walk Before You Run
wordpress_id: '45'
categories:
- strategy
---

![from Hamed Saber on flickr.com][1]

Today, I want to share a powerful strategy for making sustainable progress,
even from a standstill. It’s very simple.

We’ve got to learn to walk before we run.

#### Why Walk?

One of my favorite professors constantly reined in my overreaching ideas when
I took his artificial intelligence seminar. “Walk before you run,” he would
tell me, and I often missed the real implication of his advice until another
week sped past without any signs of progress[^1].

To walk before we run means that the first piece of any new research project
(or any project, for that matter) should be the tiniest meaningful action we
can find. If we want to simulate the human brain on a computer, we start with
a script hacked together in one afternoon that captures only the most general
features of a single neuron. If we want to master a new field, we start with
its Wikipedia page.

If the Wikipedia page looks interesting, we walk a little faster by reading a
few slightly more technical webpages, and then maybe a book. If the book holds
our interest, we start jogging and dig into a few papers, join a lab, and so
on. But, if that initial Wikipedia page practically puts us to sleep, we’ve
done so little that we can easily head in another direction. Eventually, we’ll
find something interesting. If we pursue that interest a little further and a
little faster with each step, we soon find ourselves running quickly toward
our new goal.

That’s why this strategy is so helpful. Walking before we run keeps us from
diving in over our heads too early and helps us find the simplest thing that
moves us forward. When we start new projects, we rarely know the best route to
our goal, or even if our initial goal is the one we will ultimately pursue. If
we start slowly, it’s easy to fiddle with the project until we get something
we like. If we start at full-speed, we will have gone so far with so much
momentum that by the time we discover a mistake, it may be onerously expensive
to change course. So, by keeping the cost of early exploration low, we
increase the chance that we eventually find something useful.

Also, if we start running, we may not actually get as far as we could by
walking. Imagine if, instead of starting with a basic Wikipedia page, we
started with the most prestigious journal in our newly selected field. We
might make it through the front matter, but by the time we hit the first real
article, we’d be over our heads in unfamiliar mathematics and jargon. Quickly,
our interest would turn to confusion. So, we’d abandon all hope of ever
mastering the field and decide to read some email instead.

When we start instead by walking, we begin with something laughably simple - a
few slow steps. But, the surprisingly simple often gets us surprisingly far.
In the class I mentioned in the introduction, I spent the semester writing a
program to autonomously fly planes in a flight simulator. Our first assignment
was to build something called a [PID controller][2]. It took about 15 lines of
code and was almost stupidly simple to understand. To my surprise, we could do
an awful lot of interesting flying with those 15 lines of code, and it ending
up being central to the success of my final project in the class.

If I hadn’t started with something simple, I would have quickly overwhelmed
myself with details and dynamics I didn’t understand. I would have assumed
things like advanced fluid mechanics and highly technical algorithms would be
necessary to do something as interesting as flying. The way I was thinking, I
would have needed another degree just to get started. I would never have done
anything interesting and never have understood that simple pieces can be glued
together for powerful results. That’s half the reason I’m studying
neuroscience!

Realize that walking and running are just different points on a continuum. We
don’t need to worry about when we should stop walking and start running. Every
time we decide to move a little faster and go a little further, we get closer
to running and further from walking (or standing still). So, instead of
worrying too much about your _absolute_ pace, just make sure you’re doing a
little bit more _relative_ to your last step. The exact timing will change
based on the size of the project and how many times you change direction, and
that’s okay.

‘Walk before you run’ reminds us to avoid sweeping assumptions and start with
what we know, bootstrapping from there. We work hard with what we have, rather
than building castles in the sky and hoping they’ll eventually float down to
earth. Learning to walk first makes it easy to explore until we are headed in
the right direction[^2].

#### Some Applications

Practically, there are millions of ways to apply this strategy. One of the
most powerful is to remember that people doing great science are largely made,
not born[^3]. We are all born screaming and helpless. Over time, we take a
few steps in one direction, a few steps in another, and then finally find
something to which we commit. Slowly, we learn more, perform and publish
increasingly significant experiments, and within a decade or two, we are doing
great science. Some people find the right direction earlier than others, but
each of us has to find it if we want to do great work. That goes for Einstein
and Turing as much as it does for you and me.

Another key application is that we should build a mental habit of constantly
breaking our work into small pieces. After completing each, we should quickly
but honestly ask ourselves, “Am I still heading in the right direction?” If
the answer is no, we should start exploring a bit. If the answer is yes, we
should press on, a bit more confident of our direction than we were before.
Don’t underestimate the usefulness of preliminary experiments and back of the
envelope calculations for answering this question.

We’ve also got to minimize the overhead we slap onto the things we do. If we
have an arduous system for processing everything, we’ll have a disincentive to
break projects into small pieces. With too much overhead, we’ll want to do as
little as possible. Each action will cost so much that once we’ve started,
we’ll commit to it, no matter how unhelpful or insignificant the result may
be. Keep things as simple and friction-free as possible.

Again, the key thing to realize today is that a slow start often precedes a
glorious dash for the finish. I encourage you to approach new projects by
chipping off the smallest helpful piece before tackling anything more
substantial. It’s been one of my most successful strategies, especially on
complicated or daunting projects.

On Thursday, I’ll post an update on my current trial: to read academically for
at least an hour each day. I’ll be talking specifically about the need for
connection and repetition in our reading.


[^1]: The feeling that [you’re a fraud][3] and should be making much more progress than you are never totally goes away. In fact, it can often motivate you to better results long after you’ve started to do great work. But, when you walk before you run, the feeling will almost certainly be less justified.
[^2]: A key observation here, and one I hope to talk about before too long is the importance of good data. It’s crucial that we have some meaningful information to base our decisions on as we either change direction or hold the course. Otherwise, we’re doing little better than [random][4], which we know doesn’t work.
[^3]: We all have some eccentricities in our DNA that make us naturally well-suited for one thing or another. But, even some of those can be overcome and even changed with the right training. So, while great people are not entirely made, they are nearly so.

[1]: /a/2010-11-15-walk-before-you-run/walk-sign1.png (walk-sign)
[2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PID_controller (Wikipedia - PID Controller)
[3]: http://blog.asmartbear.com/self-doubt-fraud.html (A Smart Bear - Why I Feel Like a Fraud)
[4]: http://joshrule.com/blog/great-by-design (WOTS - Great by Design)
