---
author: joshrule
date: '2010-10-17 15:19:01'
layout: post
slug: passion-misdefined
status: publish
title: Passion (Mis)Defined
wordpress_id: '22'
categories:
- passion
---

Before starting Way of the Scholar, I spent a good bit of time noodling around
(read: procrastinating) and trying to figure out what I wanted to do with my
life. I have an idea now, but for a while, I kept running across articles
about passion and how it was the key to living a happy life. Initially, I
thought they were helpful, but now, I am certain that they aren't.

Passion is a word misunderstood and improperly applied nearly every time it's
used. Some have [tried][1] to correct our mistake, but in general, the word is
abused like few others. We are told to discover our passion, follow our
passion, ignite our passion, and even to let our passion guide us to new
heights. All these phrases give an entirely improper and unhelpful view of
passion. But, passion is important.

Why is a proper definition of passion so important? Because passion properly
understood is one of the key components of massive effectiveness. It is what
fuels our desire to find and solve good problems. It is what keeps us from
giving up and abandoning the most important work we will ever do. If we
misunderstand what passion is and how we get it, we are much less likely to
develop it. The way we talk about it now is that far from the truth. So, over
the next two posts, I want to break down some of the more common misuses of
passion and build up a more accurate picture of what it really is and how it
contributes to our ability to do great things.

#### Passion is Not

Oftentimes, people describe passion as being so intimately involved in what
they are doing that they cannot focus on anything else. These people say that
they are so passionate about their work that they even lose their sense of
self in the middle of a project. What these situations describe, though, is
not passion. It is flow, a psychological state of absolute involvement studied
by Dr. Mihály Csíkszentmihályi and popularized through his many books on the
subject. Flow describes a state in which a task is just challenging enough
that a person sees continued progress only by focusing their entire attention
on that task. That is, we are so perfectly engaged in something that we don't
have enough brain power left to notice anything else, like the fact that we
exist apart from the work. Athletes commonly call it 'being in the zone'.
Passion, though, is more than just flow. People can enter flow for all sorts
of things they wouldn't ordinarily describe as a passion. For example, I enter
flow in relatively fast-moving traffic on the Beltway, but I wouldn't call
that a passion. I just don't want to crash.

Other times, people use the word passion as a synonym for interest. When you
sit through a conversation with them, they might mention 5, 6, or even a dozen
passions over the course of an hour. Whatever has caught their attention
recently qualifies as a passion. One example that comes to mind is when people
tell me, "I am just so passionate about Africa," after they have attended a
brief conference or seen a documentary. Occasionally, it's true, but most of
time, their "passion" will disappear in a few days and little significant
change occurs. Here, they are using passion simply to describe something that
momentarily grabs their attention, often through shock or shame. Passion,
though, connotes the willingness to make repeated, significant sacrifices for
whatever you are passionate about. Most fleeting interests wouldn't make the
cut, because we aren't invested in a fleeting interest. That's why it's
fleeting. A new interest may develop into a passion over time, but it doesn't
start as one. Passions are defined over years, not days.

One reason people have such a hard time getting away from distractions on the
Internet and TV is that these distractions are [designed to be addictive][2].
They exploit a mechanism in our brains that releases a tiny amount of
dopamine, a neurotransmitter connected with pleasure, every time we win a
level, uncover a twist in a show's plot, or discover a new article.
Unfortunately, people use passion to describe this addiction. They talk about
how passionate they are about the show or about a subject, when really, they
just enjoy the dopamine hit they get when reading about something or watching
the news. Describing these poofs of pleasure as passion is perhaps the most
flippant and unfortunate way we use the word today.

Note that these three misdefinitions of passion (passion as flow, passion as
interest, passion as addiction) often interact and overlap with each other.

#### Passion Is

Passion is a nurtured interest. It is not a simple psychological state like
flow. It often requires a great deal more sacrifice than a merely superficial
interest, and a great deal more time to develop. Also, it is a choice, not a
neurological exploit. I am planning to talk about it in more detail in my next
post, but I want to leave you with this thought. Our language has horribly
mangled and confused the idea of passion. If we hope to do great things as
academics, we must have a clear understanding of passion and how it is
cultivated. We must be passionate about our fields and our research, and if we
are not and cannot be so, we should probably find something else to do.

[1]: calnewport.com/blog (Study Hacks)
[2]: paulgraham.com/addiction.html (Paul Graham - Acceleration of Addictiveness)
