---
author: joshrule
date: '2010-11-22 16:19:42'
layout: post
slug: on-consistency
status: publish
title: On Consistency
wordpress_id: '53'
categories:
- strategy
---

![from photogg19 on flickr.com][1]

My parents visited this weekend, and we had a great time. We wandered through
Annapolis, ate some great meals, and really enjoyed our time together. I love
having people visit, and in fact, I’m looking forward to having my wife’s
family here for the next week as we celebrate Thanksgiving. But, during all
this holiday celebration, rather than letting my reading trial and posting
schedule slide, I’m making an extra effort to carve out the couple of hours I
need each day to read and write.

Why? Because consistency is one of the key underlying strategies to great
work, including great science.

#### Consistency

One-hit wonders are a valuable part of our culture. Some of our most memorable
music and movies come from artists we’ll never see again. Even some of our
great scientific ideas come from people who routinely made mediocre
contributions and only occasionally hit pure gold. But, those who cause the
greatest impact on the world are those who consistently provide something of
great value to the world. Newton and Einstein did not become two of the most
celebrated scientists of all time because they each solved one interesting
problem and called it a day. No, they’re significant because they regularly
solved important problems. They’re great in large part because they were
consistent.

The Ten-Thousand Hour Rule, which roughly states that it requires 10,000 hours
of ability-stretching practice to achieve mastery in a field, is another great
example of the need for consistency. 10,000 hours of deliberate, difficult
practice will never happen by chance. It only happens when we regularly and
consciously work toward a single goal. If professional athletes, chess
masters, and musical virtuosos require something on the order of 10,000 hours
to achieve greatness, we should expect no difference for science. Doing
excellent science requires regular effort over many years.

#### Not Just Consistent

As [a poster][2] from the venerable Despair, Inc. points out about
consistency, “It’s only a virtue if you’re not a screwup.” We don’t want to be
merely consistent. I’m pretty consistent about brushing my teeth every day,
but no one’s banging down my door about it (yet). We’ve got to be consistent
in the right ways, and four that are particularly relevant to us as scientists
are as follows:

*  **We need to consistently set aside time to ask questions.** As scientists, we’ve got to routinely set aside time to ask important questions of ourselves. We need to have ready answers for questions like, “What are the implications and applications for my work?”, “What’s the next step toward solving this problem?”, “How can I improve the way I’m doing my work to become more effective?”, and “Am I working on important problems?” One of our fundamental roles as scientists is to seek out the world’s most important questions. If we are not doing so regularly, we can hardly expect to do great work.
*  **We must consistently improve our ability to solve problems.** I don’t know the limit for one’s ability to do great science and solve the problems of a desperate world. But, I do know that I haven’t hit it, and my guess is that you haven’t either. Until we do, we can do more to make this world a more wonderful place to live. And, we should be regularly finding ways to improve our knowledge base, understand new experimental techniques, and solve problems more completely and quickly.
*  **We must consistently produce good, and eventually, great work.** Richard Hamming notes in _[You and Your Research][3]_ that,

   > Given two people with exactly the same ability, the one person who manages
   > day in and day out to get in one more hour of thinking will be tremendously
   > more productive over a lifetime.

   No depth of knowledge or problem-solving ability will do anyone any good if we
   are not regularly applying our skills and background to important problems.
   Rare should be the day that we haven’t made at least some progress on our
   current problem. That is, there is a limit to the helpfulness of self-
   improvement if it is not aimed at world-improvement. And, if we haven’t solved
   a problem in quite some time, we might want to reframe the problem or come
   back to it another time. Either way, we’ve got to keep moving forward.
*  **We need to consistently communicate our work to others.** Communication is not a gift given to some and not to others. It’s a skill that’s honed over time. Much modern research is cluttered with jargon and jumbled ideas. We must consistently communicate our ideas inside and outside the scientific community so that others understand the need for our work and can help us work out its implications. We must also share our findings so that they can be challenged where needed and clarified to form part of our overall understanding of the universe. The greatest science in the world is no good if we do not share in a way that impacts others.

In short, great science often develops not in the blink of an eye, but in the
steady application of effort over the course of years to ask good questions,
solve problems well, and share our solutions with the world.

#### But How?

To become more consistent, I recommend two major strategies:

First, I recommend slow, gradual change. A simple stream of water can carve a
canyon through bedrock. But, it makes such a big change by acting slowly, over
the course of centuries. Don’t immediately move from smooth plains to craggy
canyons by trying to be consistent in all areas of life. Keeping track of
everything will quickly lead to frustration and failure. Initially, just pick
one area. Give the majority of your attention to becoming consistent with that
one area. A 30-day trial might be a good way to start. Slowly, consistency in
that one area will become increasingly easy. Leverage that small consistency
to become more reliable in other areas. Start by learning to read every day,
and then more consistently ask good questions by examining the implications of
what you’re reading. From there, set aside time to design experiments
answering those questions until you consistently produce good experiments.
Don’t force consistency, but don’t ignore its development, either. Let it
develop organically, but intentionally.

Second, I recommend using an objective metric to gauge your increasing
consistency. Cal Newport illustrates this idea incredibly well in his post on
the [pyramid method][4]. Pick an initial, repeatable goal. For example, you
could propose a new experiment to your principal investigator each month.
Doing so provides a measure of how good your experimental designs are: the
more experiments your PI advises you to pursue or share with the lab, the more
consistently you are producing good ideas. Combined with slow, gradual change,
you can build a set of increasingly challenging goals which measure your
increasingly consistent performance as a scientist.

One good idea may lead to a brief period of incredibly effective research.
But, a fount of consistently good work leads to a lifetime of great science.
So, in addition to developing the mental habits which allow us to do good work
once, we must also cultivate the habits which help us to do so consistently.
Gradual change motivated with objective measures can help us to become
reliably and remarkably effective scientists, something our world urgently
needs.

[1]: /a/2010-11-22-on-consistency/water-canyon.png (water-canyon)
[2]: http://www.despair.com/consistency.html (Despair - Consistency)
[3]: http://paulgraham.com/hamming.html (Richard Hamming - You and Your Research)
[4]: http://calnewport.com/blog/2009/06/03/the-pyramid-method-a-simple-strategy-for-becoming-exceptionally-good/ (Cal Newport - The Pyramid Method: A Simple Strategy for Becoming Exceptionally Good)
