---
author: joshrule
date: '2010-10-21 16:45:31'
layout: post
slug: efficiency-in-two-parts
status: publish
title: Efficiency in Two Parts
wordpress_id: '26'
categories:
- efficiency
---

In the [last post][1], I claimed that efficiency should be a tertiary
consideration. I wrote that efficiency is useless without the support of well-
developed strategies and passions. Trying to be efficient any sooner can even
hinder our success by focusing our attention in the wrong direction.

But, once those other things are in place, efficiency is the important next
step. Today, I want to share the most important principles I know for living
efficiently. A well-considered implementation of the ideas below will do
worlds more than any collection of ad-hoc hacks ever could. These are, to the
best of my knowledge, the building blocks on which most useful efficiency
techniques have been built, and that is why understanding them is so
important. Knowing how these two concepts work and how they can be applied to
your life allows you to cohesively implement specific tools and techniques for
the greatest gain with the least effort. But, before we get there, we have to
understand the fundamentals.

#### What is Efficiency?

It’s not a difficult concept, but I neglected to actually define efficiency in
the last post. Simply put, efficiency is a measure of output per resource
used. For example, the miles per gallon a certain car achieves on the highway
is a measure of its efficiency. Miles per gallon tells us how much output (the
miles traveled) can be obtained for one unit of input (a gallon of gas).

Because efficiency is essentially a ratio, there are two basic ways to
increase efficiency. We can either extract the same output from a smaller
input, or we can extract greater output from the same input. That is, we can
go just as far on a half-gallon, or we can go twice as far on a full gallon of
gas. Both represent the same thing: a significant gain in efficiency by doing
more with less ((2m)/g = m/(g/2)).

To increase our efficiency, we must learn to do more with less. But how?

#### Cut the Flab

Nothing I know gives better insight into doing more with less than Pareto’s
Principle, also known as the 80/20 Rule or the Law of the Vital Few. It says
that most of our results come from a relatively small part of our effort, and
it is the first major principle for improving efficiency.

The idea is that most of what we do is ineffective and useless, and that only
a few of our daily activities are actually helpful for reaching our goal of
doing great science. Pareto’s Principle promotes a form of minimalism which
says the following: _focus only on the few things which consistently lead you
to good results, and ruthlessly eliminate everything else_.

For example, the Pareto Principle predicts that for any 8 hours spent in the
lab, only 2 or 3 are really useful. That’s when we get the important
writing/analysis/programming done. The rest of our time is filled with less
useful things like meetings, email, and web surfing. So, 80-90% of the work
gets done in just 2-3 hours (25-30% of the time spent).

If most of our useful work happens in just a few hours a day, we could
increase our overall efficiency in two ways. First, we could simply work those
few hours every day, and spend the rest of our time doing whatever we wanted
(napping, exercising, reading, being with family, and so on). Or, we have the
incredibly powerful option of expanding the behaviors of those few productive
hours so that they fill our entire workday. That is, if our most useful work
is in drafting a new paper, we could skip the web surfing and email addiction
and spend the entire day writing rather than just a few hours between
meetings.

Now, this idea that most of our results come from just a few causes shows up
not only in our time, but in nearly everything. I’d guess that almost any area
of your life or lab, analyzed by its contribution to your ability to do great
research, would reflect the Pareto Principle. Go ahead and try it[^1]. Find
an area where all you will keep are the things most helpful in doing great
research. Don’t be sentimental. Really ask yourself the question, “Does this
really help me do better research?” The answers may be illuminating[^2].

Focused minimalism via Pareto’s Principle is the most important principle
toward efficiency that I know. The quickest way to great science is to stop
doing the things which don’t help you get there and start focusing on the
things which do.

#### Set Limits

The second most helpful efficiency tool I know is Parkinson’s Law, which says
that work expands to consume the available resources. According to Parkinson,
if we have several months to run an experiment and write up the paper, it will
take several months. But, if we have only 3 weeks, we can do basically the
same work, and sometimes even produce better results. Deliberately restricting
resources without lowering our standards forces us to find more efficient ways
to produce the same results.

Parkinson’s Law is the logical extension of the Pareto Principle. Where Pareto
says that only a small percentage of our resources contribute to most of our
results, Parkinson says that by restricting resources from the outset and
expecting similar results, we force ourselves to rely only on our most
effective actions. We make it necessary to eliminate the large majority of our
actions which are not effective.

Of course, there are physical limits to how efficiently things can be done,
and Parkinson’s Law doesn’t deny that. But, it denies that we will stumble
onto those limits by chance. It claims that we must consciously push to find
them, because it is often unclear as to what they are or how they are
achieved. Parkinson isn’t trying to get us to run a two-hour experiment in one
hour; it’s trying to help us see that with a little rearranging and a better
protocol, it’s actually only a 55 minute experiment.

Actually, Parkinson reminds me of proofs I did in computer science as an
undergraduate. The problem would ask us to prove that an algorithm took only a
certain amount of time to run, say [O(n\*lg(n))][2]. I knew the limit, but I
didn’t know how to prove it. I just couldn’t see how to get there when my best
solution was O(n^2). After a bit (read: hours and hours) of thinking and
rearranging, though, I would eventually find a clean solution proving the
optimal result. In the same way, Parkinson tells us to set an insanely tight
limit on our resources, and then struggle through the problem until we see
some way of achieving the same results with fewer resources.

This rule may seem to conflict with what I said last time about getting
results first and then focusing on efficiency. I mean, if we build efficiency
in from the start, how do we know if we are getting the best results possible,
with or without an eye toward efficiency? Applying Parkinson’s Law can be a
gutsy move, and it’s one I probably wouldn’t recommend without some prior
experience. That is, I wouldn’t try writing my first paper in a day, blindly
hoping that Parkinson’s Law will see you through the process. Like I said last
time, efficiency is a tertiary consideration. But, once we get there,
Parkinson’s Law can be very helpful.

#### Focus on the Right Things

Very few ideas can help us become more efficient more effectively than the
Pareto Principle or Parkinson’s Law. Scores of books and potentially millions
of blog posts have been written outlining detailed tips, tricks, hacks, and
tools dedicated to ratcheting efficiency up as high as it can possibly go.
Most of them are simply unwitting implementations of these two ideas. Pareto
and Parkinson are strategies, whereas the others are simply tactical
maneuvers. I’ll be talking more about the difference in the next post.

The key thing to remember, though, is that if we think poorly, it will not
matter how sophisticated or powerful our tools are. We will still perform
suboptimally by focusing on the wrong things. So, instead of obsessing from
the start over efficiency, just remember Pareto and Parkinson. Apply them when
you can. Then, spend the rest of your day finding the right questions, finding
the best answers, and sharing them with the world.


[^1]: Feel free to start small. Keep your favorite pen and get rid of the others. Cut out mindless web-surfing for a week and fill the time with the most important writing or reading you haven’t gotten to yet. You can build from there, but do try something.
[^2]: Don’t be mercenary with your relationships, though. The people closest to you shouldn’t be cut out simply to give you a few more hours in the lab. Instead, I mean the opposite. You should focus more time on those really important relationships, rather than writing a few more hours after you’re brain is fried for the day. Focus on the people who are already important over the ones who may potentially be helpful someday in the distant future.

[1]: http://joshrule.com/blog/effectiveness-efficiency
[2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_O_notation (Wikipedia - Big O Notation)
