---
author: joshrule
date: '2010-10-25 17:03:52'
layout: post
slug: what-is-strategy-and-why-is-it-important
status: publish
title: What is Strategy, and Why is it Important?
wordpress_id: '28'
categories:
- strategy
---

I’ve mentioned strategies in passing several times already in the short life
of Way of the Scholar. But, I haven’t bothered to clarify what I mean when I
talk about them.

Today, I want to look at what strategies are and why they are such an
important component of our overall effectiveness. The right strategies
implemented with care have more power than anything else I know to transform
us from whatever we are now into people doing great science.

#### What are Strategies?

**Strategies are the mental habits and conceptual frameworks we use to make sense of the world and guide our actions.**  

Because that’s about as clear as mud, let me give an example. The scientific
method is one of our most powerful strategies. It is an incredible conceptual
framework that we use to guide our experiments. With repeated application, it
becomes a mental habit, and the implications of the scientific method affect
our opinions about everything from the mundane to the sublime. To determine if
something is true or not, we become increasingly inclined to develop a
hypothesis and empirically test it.

Strategies are something like mental best practices. Consider the success of
the scientific method, for example. Carefully selected, strategies help us
find the most useful way of looking at the world for achieving a certain goal.
They help us decide what is relevant and how to deal with relevant information
once we have it. They give us processes for moving from where we are to where
we want to be with the greatest assurance of success or the greatest
possibility for understanding truth.

The most powerful strategies seem to emerge empirically through decades or
even centuries of experience, and only then are codified into something
consistent and coherent. In that way, they can be thought of as something like
scientific theories, although many haven’t gone through anything like the
formal peer-review of modern science. Strategies are rarely the product of
armchair philosophy, but instead come about slowly as we learn from decades of
mistakes and ineffectiveness.

#### Why are Strategies Important?

Strategies are our most powerful tools for creating great science. They help
us see the world in the right way to solve the important problems of our
field. A [famous experiment][1] in psychology examined the differences between
the way novices (ex. grad students) and experts (ex. tenured professors)
solved even basic problems in physics. Both groups had extensive experience
solving the types of problems they were presented, and both had more than
adequate knowledge to solve them easily. But, the experts organized their
problem set in a fundamentally different way from the novices. The experts had
acquired a set of strategies that led them to organize the world entirely
differently from the novices, a way which made it much easier for them to
identify relevant information and solve problems.

People doing great work, then, are not necessarily faster or smarter than
others doing mediocre work. They do great things because they have changed
themselves to see the world in a certain way. They notice the things which
help them articulate and solve significant problems, and they ignore the rest.
Building the right strategies into our lives is important because through them
we begin to notice the right things unconsciously, freeing more brain power
for the novel parts of our problems.

The problems of deciding what is relevant and what is deserving of our
attention is one of the most difficult in our lives, much less our science. If
we were perfectly able to cut the noise out of our lives, focusing only on
what was important, most of us would be living far differently than we do now.
Unfortunately, we often don’t know what is noise and what is signal, or how to
remove the noise or act on the signal[^1]. A good set of strategies help us
solve these problems.

#### Strategies & Tactics

Unlike strategies, tactics are the particular tools and single-use techniques
we use to accomplish specific things throughout the day. So, while the
scientific method may be the dominant strategy we use as scientists, that
doesn’t mean we use the same tools. I use powerful data manipulation software
and an fMRI scanner for my current research. You may be using test tubes or a
cyclotron. Even though we use the same scientific method, the tactics we use
are very different.

One neat thing about having a good set of strategies is that when we apply the
appropriate ones to the question at hand, the choice of tactics becomes much
easier. Strategies work together to build a set of constraints which help us
choose the right tool for the job. Without them, I would basically be working
randomly, via trial and error. And, as [I have said before][2], great science
doesn’t happen randomly.

For example, there are hundreds of options out there for keeping todo lists.
But, my current mental habits, my current strategies, demand that it be easy
to maintain, available from anywhere, and absolutely distraction-free. So, I
use a text-file on [Dropbox][3]. The strategies constrain me to only a few
tools, making it easy to choose an optimal one. We can easily get distracted
by the tools, and forget why we needed them in the first place. We can obsess
over the newest, fastest web app out there, when all we really need to track
todos is pencil and paper. You can’t solve a problem well without a good
implementation, but you can’t solve it at all if you spend all your time
thinking only about implementation. Use strategies to get the problem clear
first, and understand the demands on your tools. Then, you can start
considering the actual tactics used to implement what the strategies suggest.

#### Looking Forward

Next time, I will show how passion, efficiency, and strategy work together to
determine our effectiveness. But, the key point today is that by adopting the
right strategies, we develop new mental habits which make it possible to do
great work. Finding and adopting these strategies is really important to me,
and will be a major theme here at Way of the Scholar. My hope is that,
together, we can find some minimal set of strategies necessary for great
science, and that we can build on those to develop set of strategies which
make us unstoppable in our specific fields.

Great science is the goal. Strategies make it possible.


[^1]: The Signal to Noise Ratio measures how much a desired signal has been corrupted by undesirable noise. If the signal is the voice of a loved one on the telephone, the noise is all the static that makes them hard to hear.

[1]: http://cognitrn.psych.indiana.edu/rgoldsto/cogsci/Chi.pdf (Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices)
[2]: http://joshrule.com/blog/great-by-design (WOTS - Great By Design)
[3]: http://db.tt/1sMy2Ew (Dropbox)
