---
author: joshrule
date: '2010-11-29 17:39:57'
layout: post
slug: apprenticeship-get-started-in-science
status: publish
title: 'Apprenticeship: Get Started in Science'
wordpress_id: '60'
categories:
- strategy
---

![blacksmith][1]

I realized recently that I’ve totally neglected one of the most significant
strategies for new scientists. It’s something I found myself doing despite my
own tendencies to work alone and drum to my own beat. And, it’s been one of
the most useful things I’ve decided to do in my journey to great science.

I’m apprenticing under an established scientist.

#### What Is Apprenticeship?

Apprenticeship has been around for centuries, and probably millennia. It’s
nothing more than working at something alongside a master as they teach you
their craft. Think of a young boy picking up a hammer and lump of iron and
learning through years of work alongside a master to reliably shape that metal
into a perfectly balanced sword. The physical doing of the craft coupled with
constant interaction between the apprentice and the master transforms the boy
into a master himself.

We can use this same idea as scientists, and I argue that it is the most
effective route to good science. We, as new scientists, can study under the
master scientists around us, learning from them much of what is required to
succeed in our field. It would be an incredible mistake to ignore this
opportunity.

In fact, apprenticeship is why so many scientists attend graduate school.
Sure, you take a few classes and are part of some formal program set out by
the university, but underneath all that, you apprentice with a master
scientist. Early on in your doctoral work, you choose an advisor and research
topic and, ideally, work closely with your advisor to craft several pieces of
good research, at least one of which becomes your dissertation. Throughout the
years that you are a doctoral student, you develop the skills and habits
necessary for your field. You learn to ask good questions by examining the
questions already asked by your advisor and building off of them. You learn to
find good solutions by helping your advisor with their experiments and
ultimately designing your own under their care. And, you learn the widely
accepted methods of communicating results in your field by publishing, giving
talks, and attending conferences. Graduate school is one of the
apprenticeships of the scientist.

But, it’s not the only one. Sometimes the path is [a bit messier][2]. I’m
apprenticing right now, but I haven’t been accepted to a single grad school,
yet. Instead, I simply emailed a lab doing interesting work and asked if I
could come and work under them to learn the mechanics of good science and to
work on important problems in computational neuroscience. I’m not taking any
classes, and I won’t receive any degrees when I leave the lab, but I will have
learned a significant amount in my time there. Depending on your field, dozens
of scientists may be happy to take you on as an apprentice without formally
enrolling you in a graduate program. If you aren’t quite ready to commit to
the expense of grad school (in terms of money, time, or otherwise), this form
of apprenticeship is ideal. All it takes to get started is an email.

#### Why Is It Good?

Apprenticeship is effective because great science requires more than a massive
body of facts or techniques. It requires that we learn a specific way of
thinking and being in the world. And, we will do that far better by
interacting with people who already think and live as scientists than by
simply reading about it. That is, instead of simply digesting highly distilled
accounts of the habits and thoughts of people doing great science,
apprenticeship gives us a chance to see scientific minds in full detail. We
can watch them work through the muddier parts of a new paper, or discern good
research from bad. We can begin to learn how they organize the world and
decide that a tiny footnote is relevant and worth more attention (perhaps
[even the Nobel Prize][3]). We can see how they design experiments or share
their results. In short, we get to see and be a part of science, rather than
simply viewing it from a distance. We learn by doing.

Also, we’ve talked about the value of [using the work of others][4] for our
own profit. Apprenticeship is an incredibly concentrated way to do exactly
that. By working under a scientist who has already established their own lab
and several lines of research, you can learn from the past mistakes of that
scientist and others in their lab without making them yourself. You can
immediately begin to adopt some of the best thought patterns available for
your field. And, you can begin to establish a support structure which guides
you away from mistakes and toward increasingly effective science. To some
degree, you can even co-opt their reputation to jumpstart your own. The right
mentors and peers can easily make your questions more insightful, your
experiments more illuminating, and your communications clearer for all.

#### But There’s More

Apprenticeship isn’t the whole story. It’s a first step showing us the way we
must think, act, and live to do acceptable science. Eventually, it ends and
leaves us with a basic set of tools. But, acceptable science is a far cry from
great science. We must continue to refine our toolset with mental habits and
experimental techniques that allow us to do truly great work in our field.

Also, we must realize that being an apprentice doesn’t mean we are doing
science. We may be learning how to do it, but we must actually go and ask
questions and perform experiments ourselves. We must live out the life
apprenticeship prepares us for.

Eventually, we’ll even need to take on our own apprentices. I don’t have much
to say about this step yet, because I’m years away from doing it myself. But,
I will note that I’m incredibly grateful for the scientists who have taken me
on as an apprentice, both in computer science and neuroscience. I’ve asked the
wrong questions and run the wrong experiments, and they’ve helped me recover.
I once spent an entire semester writing a program for my undergraduate thesis
that, with some clearer thinking, I could have put together in about two
weeks. But, I learned more about artificial intelligence that semester than
any other during my time as an undergrad. I’m improving, and my work with
established scientists has been a key part of that.

I’m moving this week’s update on my 30-day reading trial to next Monday. By
then, the trial will be over, and I’ll be able to give a full report on what
I’ve learned. So, Thursday, I’ll be exploring a variation on the idea of
apprenticeship and tying it more closely to both the reading I’ve been doing
and the idea that ‘[one good thief is worth ten good scholars][4]’.

[1]: /a/2010-11-29-apprenticeship-get-started-in-science/blacksmith.png (blacksmith from ghbrett on flickr.com)
[2]: http://calnewport.com/blog/2010/05/10/how-to-become-a-star-screenwriter-a-case-study-in-modern-craftsmanship/ (StudyHacks - How to Become a Star Screenwriter: A Case Study in Modern Craftsmanship)
[3]: http://michaelnielsen.org/blog/the-mismeasurement-of-science/ (Michael Nielsen - The Mismeasurement of Science)
[4]: http://joshrule.com/blog/one-good-thief-is-worth-ten-good-scholars/ (WOTS - One Good Thief is Worth Ten Good Scholars)
