---
author: joshrule
date: '2010-12-09 17:42:39'
layout: post
slug: think-outside-your-head
status: publish
title: Think Outside Your Head
wordpress_id: '68'
categories:
- strategy
---

![hot chocolate from Br3nda on flickr.com][1]

I've talked before about [shaping your environment to reflect your brain][2].
The basic idea is that our minds are good at some things, like solving bite-
sized problems, but bad at others, like remembering what time that meeting is
on Thursday[^1]. So, by taking the things our brains are bad at and stuffing
them into a highly visible place in our environment, we can free up some extra
attention for the stuff we want to do consistently: find problems, solve them,
and share our solutions!

Today, I'll expand on that idea by talking about how we can give even more
brain power to our research by doing most of our thinking outside our heads.

#### A Clarification

I don't mean we should literally think outside our heads. That's a messy
process better fitting a B-grade science fiction movie than real science.
Instead, I'm encouraging you to get your ideas into the wild. Don't let them
stay in your head. Build them, write them down, or talk them over with a
friend. Outside your head, ideas have a chance to grow and mature as you bump
into them over the course of weeks or months. Inside your head, they just mold
and rot in some dank, dark corner, eventually fading into nothingness.

**Getting ideas out of your head not only keeps them from dying a dark and lonely death, but it also pushes you to make them better.**

Learning relies heavily on [building connections][3]. And, that's something
our brains are specialized to do - they're absolutely wonderful at building
connections. But, we often ask our brains to do lots of other things, like
remember Christmas lists or keep several intricate and moving parts of a
simulation in our head all at once. Those sorts of things bog down our ability
to build connections and diffuse our attention. By getting those sorts of
things outside our head, we can get back to building the connections we need
to solve problems.

#### Write Stuff Down

As an undergrad, I worked as a TA for my department's data structures course.
Mostly, that meant hanging out in the computer lab and helping students debug
their programs. I was constantly amazed at students' aversion to writing
things down or sketching out their plan of attack. They almost invariably
jumped to the code before they even considered using pen and paper.

That's a huge mistake! Often, our ideas are vague and more premonitions than
anything actionable. Executing right away, or even worse, ignoring your ideas,
just sets you up for disaster. Writing and sketching forces you to find a
concrete representation for new ideas. It also slows you down long enough that
you can consider pieces of the idea in sequence and get a feel for how they
link to one another. Pen and paper, or even keyboard and text editor, can
reveal the missing pieces of an idea far more quickly than just running
through everything in your head one more time.

Also, writing persists. If you write something up today, it'll probably be
there tomorrow (barring a massive fire or hard drive failure). That gives you
a chance to come at an idea with fresh eyes, noting connections you hadn't
seen before and tearing out connections that weren't really there. Over time,
these revisions can totally reshape an idea into something more elegant and
more powerful than anything you'd produce off-the-cuff.

I'm not the only one giving the thumbs-up to writing. Newton wrote hundreds of
thousands of words in his lifetime, and Da Vinci kept detailed journals of his
discoveries and ideas. Although more an inventor than scientist, Edison kept
incredibly detailed journals, too. You could even argue that our system of
publishing for journals and conferences is just an elaborate system of
thinking outside our heads so we can solve problems faster. In any case, good
scientists write, and they write extensively.

#### Talk to People

People are like paper that can talk back, which makes them one of the most
useful ways out there for sharpening your ideas and remembering them. When you
have a new idea, you often see just part of what it will take for it to work.
Explaining ideas to someone else keeps you from skipping over the fuzzy parts.
You have to lay everything out clearly enough for someone with different
experiences to make the same connections you've made. Doing so makes your own
thinking much fuller than if you'd simply ignored the idea and left it under a
pile of opinions about last night's dinner.

Other people have different ideas that can improve or even replace your own.
They may see potential benefits you had ignored, or they might see the
potential catastrophe waiting around the corner. And, unlike you, others may
not agree with your ideas, and you may have to defend them. A few minutes of
friendly back-and-forth sometimes does more to clarify an idea than weeks of
solitary writing.

Also, you may not be the first one to have had your idea, and others can often
recommend someone with similar ideas that might be helpful to you. That's why
good teams often get much more done than the same number of solitary
scientists. They have a larger pool of experiences from which to draw
connections as a group. Remember, the goal isn't brilliance or fame, it's
scientific discoveries that make the world a better place. Use all the help
you can get.

If you're [apprenticing][4], your mentor is often a great person for
brainstorming and refining your ideas. I meet at least weekly with the head of
my lab, and these are often the most productive parts of the week for me. I
have a deeper understanding of my own work than any of the other projects in
the lab, so working with him on my own research makes it even easier to see
the differences between our thinking. I've spent a lot of time thinking about
my results, and he quickly finds interpretations I'd completely missed. Seeing
that helps me understand how the gaps in my mental habits and how I can change
them to become a better scientist.

People will often help you think through something for free, or for just a cup
of coffee and a scone. That's not a bad price to pay for a clearer
understanding of where you're headed.

#### Go Build Something

Writing things down and talking with other people are enormously helpful, and
often vastly underapplied in our lives. I'm writing more than I ever have in
my life, at least an hour each day, but I rarely feel like I've exhausted my
ideas. And, my thinking is rarely challenged as much as when I talk with
others.

But, there are some ideas that really just need to be tested. You can write or
talk about an experiment all you want, but eventually, it needs to be run. And
sometimes, especially with simpler ideas, all it takes is 1/2-hour or so to
whip something into reality. If that's the case, I urge you to try stuff out.
Tweak and rerun a simulation. Run some back of the envelope calculations to
get a basic model started for a new idea. Go ahead and sprinkle some extra
cinnamon in your hot chocolate.

I'm not saying, just do it! That's an [overeager, under-thinking
platitude][5]. If you rush after every idea you have, you'll rarely do
anything. Many things deserve significant writing and conversation before
implementing. But, others ideas just need to be tested.

Building can be especially useful if you're at a dead end. By building what
you have so far, you often bump into problems you hadn't considered yet, which
drives new questions and more problem-solving. As long as you're solving
useful problems, you're probably headed in a good direction.

Richard Hamming notes in _The Art of Doing Science and Engineering_ that
people doing great science are much more like to scratch out back-of-the-
envelope calculations than those doing mediocre work. They've made a habit of
trying things out and building small scale models before investing energy in
something larger, which is a great example of [walking before you run][6].
More importantly for today's purposes, though, it's an affirmation that
sometimes, hacking something together is the way to go.

#### Next Time

There's another reason thinking outside your head is important. It tells your
brain your thoughts are important. All the experiences of writing and talking
and building give your brain a reason to review your ideas a few times and
work out the kinks while you eat lunch or make a cup of tea.

There's a lot more to that idea, and on Monday, I'll talk more about why
stepping away from work is so important for solving the difficult problems of
science.


[^1]: Another interesting application of the idea that our brains are good at some things and bad at others is Cal Newport's [Plan.txt][7].

[1]: /a/2010-12-09-think-outside-your-head/hot-chocolate.png (hot chocolate from Br3nda on flickr.com)
[2]: http://joshrule.com/blog/trial-1-day-22 (WOTS - Trial 1: Day 22)
[3]: http://joshrule.com/blog/trial1day15/ (WOTS - Trial 1: Day 15)
[4]: http://joshrule.com/blog/apprenticeship-get-started-in-science/ (WOTS - Apprenticeship: Get Started in Science)
[5]: http://calnewport.com/blog/2008/06/27/dangerous-ideas-getting-started-is-overrated/ (StudyHacks - Dangerous Ideas: Getting Started is Overrated)
[6]: http://joshrule.com/blog/walk-before-you-run/ (WOTS - Walk Before You Run)
[7]: http://calnewport.com/blog/2008/11/11/plantxt-the-most-effective-productivity-tool-that-youve-never-heard-of/ (StudyHacks - Plan.txt: The Most Effective Productivity Tool That You've Never Heard Of)
