---
author: joshrule
date: '2010-10-17 15:20:58'
layout: post
slug: effectiveness-efficiency
status: publish
title: Effectiveness > Efficiency
wordpress_id: '24'
categories:
- effectiveness
---

It's better to do important things well than to do them quickly. Currently, I
spend several hours working through a new idea before I post it. I could force
myself down to 15 or 20 minutes for a significant time savings, but the result
would more closely resemble pig slop than a cogent idea. My guess, though, is
that you don't really care how quickly I create a post. You'd probably just
care that they effectively communicate a single idea useful for doing great
science rather than a collection of mental food scraps. And, I certainly want
to think clearly about my goal of doing great research instead of pursuing it
in a muddle. So, it is far more important for me to focus on writing a post
well than on writing it quickly.

The same is true for our research. If we want to make a real contribution to
science, our goal must be to do great work, not fast work. If we can do great
work quickly, all the better, but it's icing on the cake. We need to do great
work first. Trying to speed things up any earlier is like searching for the
fastest way to deliver mail by horse. In the age of email, it's a laughable
case of premature optimization. The search for an optimal horse is wasted
where a more careful consideration of the problem and our approach to solving
it would have been more appropriate.

Efficiency is a tertiary consideration. We need to get the strategies right
first and set up the proper mental framework for our problem. We need to take
time to ensure we are even solving the right problem. Then, we need to
cultivate a self-sacrificing love, a passion, for our work. Finally, once we
are doing and loving great work, we can begin to consider reducing the
resources needed to do our research.

Delaying the hunt for efficiency also means delaying the hunt for specific
tools and techniques[^1]. These are merely the tactics we use to implement
strategies we have already developed. Until we have carefully selected,
provably good mental habits, we have no business obsessing over a new piece of
software or the new ACME research awesomizer from ACME Widget Co.

Please don't misunderstand me. Efficiency is both wonderful and desirable. It
is breath-taking to do remarkable things with minimal resources. But, using
fewer resources to get a result is not nearly as important as actually getting
the result. We should be more concerned with finding the right problems and
developing a passion for them than with quickly solving the wrong problems.
One makes a huge difference in the world, and the other simply generates
noise.

Efficiency does play a role in our effectiveness, though. Eventually, the
passion and strategy are well-developed, and it makes sense to turn our
attention to efficiency. These moments come proportionally sooner for things
less related to our research - grocery shopping, for instance. So, I am
planning to talk next time about a few of the most important tricks I know for
improving efficiency.

But, please don't leave until you understand that consistent, great work is
far more important than any collection of tricks and hacks we may ever find,
especially if those tricks distract us from the real work ahead of us. We can
only work quickly once we can already work well.


[^1]: I don't mean the major tools and techniques that define our disciplines. I mean something like the perennial programmers' debate over text editors and operating systems. We should understand both the basic physical and conceptual tools of our trade. We just shouldn't be quibbling over model years.
