---
author: joshrule
date: '2010-12-13 18:52:03'
layout: post
slug: rest-is-work
status: publish
title: Rest is Work
wordpress_id: '70'
categories:
- admin
---

![get some rest by dakotaduff on flickr.com][1]

Recently, Tony Schwartz outlined [6 keys for excellence in any field][2].
Among them was an encouragement to keep practice brief and intense. In fact,
he argued that great performers tend to practice for about 4.5 hours each day.
That's all they need. Does that number hold for scientists? I don't know. And,
I also don't know if it holds for people still becoming great performers.
Schwartz just wrote a [book][3] about the topic, and I'd love to pick it up
from the library to find out. In the meantime, it's still a provocative
thought; if we only need about 4.5 hours a day to be great, what do we do with
the rest of our time?

One option would be to argue that if we can be great in 4.5 hours, we could be
fantastically and unbelievably great in 9 or 13.5 hours a day. But, that
argument's probably mistaken.

While great performers need _only_ about 4.5 hours a day to work, I'd argue
that they probably _can't_ use much more than that without seeing
significantly degraded performance.

Why?

#### Great Work Demands Rest

Great work demands a lot out of the people who do it. It requires incredibly
focused attention to well-defined problems, consistently applied over months
and years. It's not checking emails, sitting through yet another meeting, or
cruising the blogosphere. It's writing and rewriting code to elegance,
rehearsing plays until the team makes them look effortless, and agonizing over
the paradigm for an experiment until it's robust and insightful. It's the real
work, not the setup and logistics surrounding it. Those things are important,
but they aren't the goal. Great work - that is the goal, and it takes a lot
out of us.

So, to continue doing great work for months and years at a time, we need to
rest. We need to build up the energy required for complete [focus][4]. It
takes a lot more time to store up energy than it does to burn it.

Even more importantly, our best work often happens while we're resting. People
think they solve problems only when they're actively working on them. But,
great problems are often not solved while hunched over a computer, reading
textbooks, or holding a stack of test tubes. They're often solved while
hunched over the fireplace, reading the paper, or holding a sandwich. Even
after we've decided to stop 'working' for the day, our brain continues to
grind away at the problems we've presented it.

Actually, in the [talk][5] I mentioned last week, Rich Hickey goes so far as
to say that the work we do while we are 'working' is important mostly to
assign our brains meaningful work to do while we are 'resting'.

Fine, but how does all this apply to us as scientists?

#### You Need Short Breaks

First, I'd recommend a number of short 5-10 minute breaks throughout the day,
and at least 1/2-hour for lunch. Sometimes, all it takes is a quick trip to
the bathroom for your brain to jumble things around a bit and provide some new
ideas. When you have an iron-fisted grip on a problem and are forcibly trying
to make helpful connections, your brain doesn't have a chance to find the
relationships you actually need that were lying just under the surface.

I can't tell you how many times I've seen the value of these breaks. Just the
other day, I was building up a new installation of [Arch Linux][6] on my
laptop. Specifically, I was trying to install a program that would let me view
images without leaving the console (Yes, I'm one of those types of geeks. More
on that in an upcoming post). In any case, I ran into a snag. The program
compiled, but just wouldn't run. It just kept spitting back an error that
really didn't make any sense. After I'd monkeyed with it for a few minutes, I
sat down to dinner. And after just a few minutes of eating and chatting with
my wife, a solution just popped right into my stream of thoughts. I wasn't
thinking about the problem at all. A solution simply floated up and presented
itself. I ran over, tried it out, and presto, a picture popped up in my
console.

I'm not telling that story to prove that I'm some geeky genius. I'm not, not
by a long shot. No, the point is that it's best to work until we hit a wall,
double-check that it's a wall, and then skip off to do something totally
different. Oftentimes, our brains dissolve the wall subconsciously while we're
focused on something entirely different.

Before moving on, let me say one more thing about these types of breaks.
During the workday, we need breaks that take us away from input and probably
most forms of output, too. You've got to stop demanding your brain pay
attention to new problems, and let it work through the ones you've already
given it. So, things like surfing the web or replying to emails don't count as
breaks.

Breaks are things like:

*  Brewing and sipping a cup of tea
*  Eating lunch with friends and overlooking a great view
*  Taking a leisurely walk through some green space
*  Visiting the bathroom
*  Mindless errands - dropping off paperwork or picking up a library book
*  Exercising

#### You Need Long Breaks

Short breaks are great for maintaining focus throughout the work day, while
you're actually running experiments or working through new papers. But, we're
working off the idea that you'll only have about 4 or 5 hours of peak
concentration before you begin to see serious problems with your ability to
focus on your science.

During the rest of the day, then, you should go be great at something else.
Being a great friend and family member are two of the more important options
that come to mind. But, there's probably a million other things you could also
become great at with that time. And, there's only two key criteria for what
you choose.

**Don't let your non-scientific work become the [top problem in your head][7] unless it truly is more important than your scientific work (family or friends, for example).** If you don't consciously choose one problem as the most important, your brain will probably choose for you. And, instead of devising a new experiment while washing your hair, you'll write great banjo solos. Banjos are great, but if you'd rather be a great banjoist than do great science, this may not be the right blog for you. In any case, keep your priorities straight, and be careful about what you let become the top problems in your head.

**Be great at things which are different enough that your brain has a chance to review your work and mull over the walls you've hit.** That is, you don't want to continue seeing the same sorts of problems. Neuroscience and psychiatry are probably too close for one to be a hobby and the other primary work. Neuroscience and computer programming might be a better fit. Although, physically changing mediums is even better. So, moving from neuroscience to sewing is probably more helpful still.

Also, give yourself multi-day breaks. Weekends, vacations, and sabbaticals
aren't rewards for time served. They're time for you to ruminate over the
biggest problems in your work while focusing on other things. Long restful
periods are not necessarily more important than your 'working' hours at the
lab, but they're no less important, either. Without both, you severely
handicap your ability to solve problems, which is the bulk of science.

#### Conclusion

Rest is not just an opportunity for us to recover from a hard day of work. It
is actually when some of the hardest work gets done. For scientists, and
others who regularly solve difficult problems, breaks need to be a regular
part of our life if we have any concern for making this world a better place.

[1]: /a/2010-12-13-rest-is-work/dog-in-bed.png (get some rest by dakotaduff on flickr.com)
[2]: http://blogs.hbr.org/schwartz/2010/08/six-keys-to-being-excellent-at.html (Tony Schwartz - Six Keys to Being Excellent at Anything)
[3]: http://www.amazon.com/Way-Were-Working-Isnt-Performance/dp/1439127662 (Tony Schwartz - The Way We're Working Isn't Working)
[4]: http://www.amazon.com/Rapt-Attention-Focused-Winifred-Gallagher/dp/1594202109 (Winifred Gallagher - Rapt: Attention and the Focused Life)
[5]: http://bit.ly/ffbxXe (Rich Hickey - Hammock-Driven Development)
[6]: http://www.archlinux.org (Arch Linux)
[7]: http://www.paulgraham.com/top.html (Paul Graham - The Top Idea in Your Mind)
