---
author: joshrule
date: '2010-10-28 18:27:25'
layout: post
slug: a-formula-for-effectiveness
status: publish
title: A Formula for Effectiveness
wordpress_id: '32'
categories:
- effectiveness
- efficiency
- passion
- strategy
---

I am really excited about today’s post. I want to take three of the major
concepts we have talked about so far - passion, efficiency, and strategy - and
use a single formula to represent their relative importance in creating a
fourth major concept - effectiveness.

I want to say right up front that this is not a recipe for quick, easy,
unthinking success. I don’t know any. I do know that hard work and single-
minded focus over a long period of time can take you surprisingly far, though.
Remember, this site is about my experiments in getting from now to great
science. I don’t have everything worked out, and probably 1/3 - 1/2 of what I
do will have to be revised or thrown out entirely before I actually start
doing great science.

I am also not claiming that what follows is _the_ formula for effectiveness.
Because there are an uncountably infinite number of possible lives to live,
it’s probably impossible to say that I have considered all the paths to great
work. In fact, I hope to improve this equation over time as I find holes in
what it says.

All I am trying to provide is a simple way to relate the ideas of efficiency,
passion, strategy, and effectiveness. There may be other routes to
effectiveness. This one seems the most useful.

#### Piece By Piece

Effectiveness, then, is composed of three significant components, all of which
we have discussed in the past.

The first significant part of effectiveness is efficiency. It’s a measure of
how much output we produce for every unit of input. ‘Miles per gallon’ is a
great example because it measures how much output (the miles traveled) we get
from each unit of input (a gallon of gas).

The second major piece of effectiveness is passion. Although the word is badly
abused today, passion has a very specific meaning. It represents a nurtured
interest, one which has been cultivated over time to become one of the great
loves of your life[^1]. Passion measures how much you are willing to give
up, and even suffer, for the object of your passion. The more you are willing
to give up, the further you can go before you run out. So, if efficiency is
something like ‘miles per gallon’, passion is something like the gas in your
tank. It measures the amount of input you have for a given interest. The more
you have, the greater the obstacles you can get through.

The third and final component of effectiveness is strategy, or rather, a
collection of strategies. These strategies work together and reinforce each
other to help us to see the world in the right way to accomplish the job ahead
of us. They are the mental habits we use to decide what’s relevant for solving
our problems. Think of strategies as a map. Without a map, we turn at random
and may or may not ever get where we are going. With a sketchy map, we might
get there, but we can’t be sure we are taking the best path to our
destination. With a great map, though, it’s much easier to get where we are
headed. In fact, with the right strategies, we need less gas in the tank and
don’t need to be as efficient to get the same results, because good strategies
can help us improve our route so we take the best possible trip from here to
our destination. We don’t need to climb mountains if we’re just headed across
the street.

#### Putting it all Together

I propose that these three parts - efficiency, passion, and strategy - relate
to each other in the following way:

\[ effectiveness = (\sqrt{efficiency}\cdot passion)^{strategy} \]

  
Read it over again, because this equation is what Way of the Scholar is being
built on. We want to do great science, and this equation lays out a roadmap to
being surprisingly effective, to doing great work. A lot of my future work
will ask how we can specifically apply these ideas to do great science, rather
than just great work in general.

Now, I cannot guarantee the absolute correctness of this equation, but I think
it captures the major concepts pretty well. If you think there’s a problem
with it, [let me know][1] I don’t want to quibble over whether I should be using a square root or a cube root,
because we’re not really there, yet. I am just trying to lay out the major
pieces of effectiveness and their relative importance. If I’ve missed a major
idea, I want to fix that.

#### Breaking it Down

Our formula for effectiveness compactly represents several ideas. So, let’s
unpack it a bit.

First, a basic interpretation. Efficiency, output/input, multiplies with
passion, input, to give us a basic measure of output. The result represents
how much work we can do. Then, strategy relates to it exponentially, showing
how well we use that work to get results. The result is a measure of how
effective we are.

Second, a good set of strategies is overwhelmingly the most important thing
for effectiveness. Consider the difference between \((\sqrt{10}\cdot 2)^{2} =
40\), \((\sqrt{2}\cdot 10)^{2} = 200\), and \((\sqrt{2}\cdot 2)^{10} =
32,768\). By focusing on strategy, our returns are astronomically greater than
if we focused our energy elsewhere. Great strategies can overcome a lot of
weakness in passion and efficiency. In fact, growing effectiveness through
good strategies encourages us to stick around long enough to develop a strong
passion and high efficiency.

Third, we should work simultaneously, but less intensely, to cultivate a
passion for our work. I’ve said before that passion is not as important as
good strategies, which comes through in the equation. But, the equation also
shows that passion is more important than efficiency. That is, it is better to
nurture a deep love for our work than simply to do it with minimal resources.
If we love what we do but are inefficient, we can often find more resources to
make up for our inefficiency[^2]. But, if we don’t care about our work and
are simply efficient, we’ll quit soon after the resources begin to run dry.

Fourth, efficiency should be relatively ignored until we are beginning to
reach a ceiling with passion and strategy. It shouldn’t be zero, but it
shouldn’t be our big focus, either. Efficiency is such a weak contributer that
focusing on it prematurely will destroy our long-term effectiveness. I can’t
count the number of times I have focused on efficiency first and flat-out
missed the point of the problem I was solving. I was so distracted by shiny
tools or new ideas that I missed the great solution clearly suggested by good
strategies. Instead, I was quickly solving the wrong problem. Don’t make the
same mistake.

Fifth, the results aren’t linear. Efficiency, passion, and good strategies
multiply one another. The more we optimize one, the more impact it has when we
boost the others. Good strategies allow every small gain in passion or
efficiency to have a potentially huge impact on our effectiveness. Similarly,
a well-developed passion or careful attention to efficiency (when the time is
right for it), allow small gains in the overall value of our strategies to
have exponential impacts on our effectiveness.

Sixth, you won’t be massively effective by focusing only on one of the three
major pieces. If you have a great understanding of what you are doing and
what’s relevant to the problem, but never actually do anything or give any
resources to solving it, your overall effectiveness is still zero. The same is
true for all three. All three have to be non-zero for our effectiveness to be
non-zero. And, all three have to be really high for our work to be great. But,
we need to start with a focus on strategy.

#### Bottom Line

Our effectiveness is not some mystical and inscrutable quality. It’s composed
of three very basic ideas: how much we love what we do, how few resources we
use to do it, and how well we think about what we are doing. Investing our
time and attention to optimizing those three things allows us to become
ridiculously effective people who are routinely doing great things. On Monday,
I want to use this equation for effectiveness to make it a bit clearer why Way
of the Scholar exists and what sort of benefit you can expect to get from it.


[^1]: You’ve got to be careful here. Faith and family should always come before other passions. But, we can do that and do it well. Each part has to reinforce the others. Our family needs to be onboard with our work and share our faith. Our faith should inspire our work and value our families. We step away from our work to invest in our family, and use the work to make the world a better place for them. Our passions should harmonize. Otherwise, it’s practically impossible to do great work.
[^2]: Irrelevant hobbies may fall by the wayside. We may ask the world to donate to our cause. We may finally gain the courage to ask a patron for resources. We may stop watching so much television or surfing the web so much. Resources are available if we love our work too much to quit.

[1]: http://twitter.com/joshrule (Josh on Twitter)
