---
author: joshrule
date: '2010-10-17 15:19:21'
layout: post
slug: passion-properly
status: publish
title: Passion Properly
wordpress_id: '21'
categories:
- passion
---

Previously, we looked at how passion, although an essential component of
effectiveness, is radically misused and abused in a majority of cases. I
claimed that passion was not a simple mental state, nor a superficial interest
or biological compulsion. These things may or may not result from our
passions, but in any case, they are not themselves passions. I closed by
proposing instead that passion is a nurtured interest. Today, let's look more
carefully at what that definition implies about our passions and our
relationships to them.

#### Passion Nurtures

To nurture is to help grow or help develop. Growth and development take time,
so we shouldn't expect passion to spring forth fully grown overnight. Passions
come about gradually and must be purposely developed. We have to give
fledgling passions careful attention and even learn to love them. In academia,
that typically means we must develop a deep understanding of our field and a
strong belief in its importance for the world. We must come to know how the
field developed, where it is now, and where it is going. We need to learn
about the tools currently used in the field, and begin to think about what
tools may help it grow in the future. We need to know the most important
questions in the field and currently proposed answers, and we need to think
about the questions that will become important for the field 10-15 years down
the line. In short, we need to intimately know our field.

Notice, too, that the kind of knowledge and love that passion requires doesn't
come about easily. We have to give up, to sacrifice and even suffer at times,
for the sake of that knowledge and love. Light interests will go by the
wayside, and the object of our passion, our discipline, will take up
increasingly more of our mental time and attention. This makes sense
considering that 'passion' was originally used to describe the state of Jesus
of Nazareth as he walked to his crucifixion. He certainly suffered a great
deal for the object of his passion, a lost world.

Nurturing a passion is not all pain and suffering. There are times of great
joy. But, if we abandon a growing passion as soon as difficulties appear, we
will never be passionate about anything.

#### Passion is Interested

If our passions are interests, then they are choices. We may be influenced by
nature or nurture to be initially interested in one thing over another, but we
can deliberately redirect our interest. If I decided to leave neuroscience and
be interested in astronomy, I could do it (but don't plan on it). We are not
born with an innate passion that is the key to our happiness if only we could
discover it. Passions are not randomly thrust upon us. Instead, we choose to
develop passions over time, by nurturing a fledgling interest into full-grown
dedication to a field or idea.

Because passions are interests, a well-developed passion takes commitment.
Interest means we are curious to know more about something. And, by
definition, we are curious when things are outside the ordinary. So, if we
want to develop a world-changing passion, we must choose _something_ to be
passionate about. Being interested in everything cannot be done and means
nothing, because it tries to say that everything is extraordinary. And while
that is romantic, it is also impossible. Being interested in the biology of
_c. elegans_ or the mathematics of hyperbolic space, though, does mean
something and can be done.

#### Passion by Example

I want to close with two examples that illustrate this idea of passion as a
nurtured interest. First, think about building a bonfire. Initially, all we
have is the spark of a match being struck. That's just an initial interest in
a bonfire. Then, the match is lit and held to paper. At this point, the
interest is just beginning to grow and could easily be snuffed out. It also
doesn't really change the world much. It won't keep anyone warm or do much
good for roasting marshmallows. But, over time, wood is carefully added and
the flame spreads. Eventually, we have a raging bonfire with a deep bed of
coals. That initial interest has been nurtured to a point where it can do a
great deal of good for the world around it. The fire now can warm everyone
through a cold night and roast enough marshmallows to feed everyone as many
s'mores as they can eat.

Second, think about a marriage where husband and wife are as madly in love at
age 75 as they were at 25. An initial interest in each other, nurtured over
time, led to marriage and beyond. For over 50 years, this couple has continued
to develop an interest in one another, to the point that they are willing to
sacrifice their own dreams, aspirations, and petty wants for the good of the
other person. Their initial interest in each other matured through infatuation
to become a defining part of who they are. They would be willing to suffer
just about anything to see the object of their passion, their spouse, continue
to live a good life. That is the epitome of passion.

Again, passion is not something we must discover or follow. It is something we
must nurture like a match in the wind or a new relationship. Over time,
though, we can build passions for our fields that keeps us seeking answers to
the toughest questions long after others have given up. And, we can use these
passions to drive the research we need to make the world a better place.
