---
author: joshrule
date: '2010-11-18 16:52:25'
layout: post
slug: trial1day15
status: publish
title: Trial1:Day15
wordpress_id: '49'
categories:
- trials
---

![from DavidR_ on flickr.com][1]

Today is the fifteenth day of my 30-day trial to spend an hour each day
reading work specifically tied to my scientific interests. I’ll run through a
few of my observations from this week and then dive into a more detailed
discussion on the fundamental role of connection for internalizing new ideas.

#### This Week: Some Observations

I haven’t missed any readings this week (but I did have a close call, see
below). In fact, I’ve finished just over 30% of the textbook I’m reading, and
I also read about a paper-and-a-half last weekend. So again, judging by the
trial’s definition - read academically for an hour each day - I’m cruising
along at full-speed.

But, the actual amount of reading I completed this week was noticeably lower
than for the first week. During week one, I read about 20% of the textbook,
and this week, I only managed 13%. I also read several papers during the first
week but didn’t even finish 2 this week. What gives?

First, I nearly forgot my reading on Saturday, so I didn’t start into a paper
until well after 22:00. I was actually just reviewing a 5-page paper I’d
already read, but it took me the full hour to finish it. I was so tired I
could barely keep even a sentence in my head, and I kept reading the same
paragraph again and again. It was pathetic. Use the morning to do your most
important tasks, and leave less demanding work for later in the day.

Second, I waded through a few textbook chapters on molecular signaling in the
brain this week. Unlike the material I’d read previously, these chapters were
loaded with new concepts. I like what I read to be concept-dense, but there
are two ways to do that. One is to have lots of concepts covered in scant
detail. That’s what these chapters did, mentioning dozens of new proteins and
neurotransmitters on each page, but never describing any in detail. The other
way to be concept-dense is to pick out a single idea and tease as much out of
it as you can before moving to the next concept. So far, all but a couple of
chapters in the book have been written this way.

This second method seems more useful to me, in large part because it often
does a better job of communicating thematically. Overarching themes make it
easier to build connections from paragraph to paragraph. And, building strong
connections between ideas is perhaps the most important thing we can do when
learning new material.

#### Learning as Connection

As scientists, we are constantly soaking in information. Even if we are
careful to pick out only the most relevant research from others, we are still
usually knee-deep in new papers and data from our most recent experiments. To
expand the bounds of knowledge, we can never stop learning.

So, understanding how to quickly internalize new material is a critically
important skill. Learning quickly is especially important for people like me
who are brand-new to their field. We have to build an adequate background as
quickly as possible so that we can stop worrying about vocabulary and start
working on important problems.

My big takeaway this week is that **connection is key for learning new
concepts**.

By connection, I mean that none of the ideas in our head are completely
isolated. They are tied to other ideas and experiences in an incredibly
complicated web. Some of my most profound spiritual experiences smell like
pine trees, because they took place in a forest in Michigan. The experience
had little to do with pine trees, but the experience and the smell are now
strongly connected in my head. And I’m constantly making bad jokes because
every time someone says something, the words and phrases they use connect to a
hundred different nodes in my web. Often, I think the connections are funny
(and occasionally, I’m right).

If we are learning new and alien concepts, we need to tie them into our web by
building as many connections as possible. The faster we do that, the faster we
learn. The better we are at building connections, the better we are at
learning.

I mentioned that I would also be talking about repetition today as another key
for learning new concepts. But, I realized a few days ago that repetition is
just a brute-force method of forming connections. We present ourselves with a
new concept, and hope that we subconsciously pull a small kernel into our web,
knowing that most of what we learn gets thrown out with our short-term memory.
The next time we see the concept, we hope our brains will connect new
information to the kernel we’ve already learned and internalize a bit more.
After several repetitions, we tend to learn concepts pretty well. It’s not
optimal, but repetition doesn’t require much effort, so we use it by
default[^1].

#### Building Connections

There are several ways we can reduce the number of repetitions needed for
learning or, equivalently, maximize the impact of each repetition. Each of
them boils down to one thing: building strong connections every time we
encounter an important concept.

Perhaps the most effective way to build new connections is to pay attention to
what you’re doing. When you are only partially engaged, you ruin your ability
to form new connections. As soon as they start to appear, you flip to another
task, and the connections are cleaned out to make room for something less
important. Simplify! Do one thing at a time and physically remove
distractions. Give your brain a chance. If you give yourself an easy way out,
you’ll inevitably move from attention to distraction. I know, because I’ve
been there. Don’t set yourself up for failure[^2].

Also, give yourself plenty of time to learn new ideas. When we rush ourselves,
it’s usually because we are focused on what’s coming next rather than on what
is happening now. Paying complete attention to what we’re learning right now
gives us a much better chance of remembering it later.

Another key finding from recent research is that we shouldn’t immediately dive
from a period of heavy learning into something else. Our brain automatically
builds connections for us, but primarily during low-intensity tasks like
enjoying a cup of coffee or walking across campus. So, take advantage of your
brain’s built-in web-builder. Work through something new, and then take a
short walk or grab a snack.

Also, read actively. Draw analogies between concepts you’ve already
internalized. Use mnemonic devices like our colorful friend ROY G. BIV and
thought experiments like Schrödinger's Cat to bring difficult ideas to life.
Tell explanatory stories relating several concepts under a unified theme. Take
notes on what you read, but force yourself to write down your own ideas or
restate the text for a fourth grader. Ask yourself, “What does this mean?”
rather than just, “What does this say?” Implement [some of the great study
techniques][2] that Cal Newport details over at StudyHacks.

#### Coming Up

Again, we learn by connecting the known to the unknown. The more effectively
we build those connections, the less time we have to spend learning each
concept. The more quickly we understand what’s already been done, the faster
we can move on to the work that still needs doing. Science is not about
reading papers or memorizing reams of minutiae. It’s about asking the best
questions, finding the best answers, and sharing our discoveries with the
world.


[^1]:  Some forms of repetition are better than others. [Spaced repetition][3], for example, is far more effective than simply repeating the same thing four times in a row.
[^2]: I’m not saying learning isn’t a great deal of fun. It is. I’m also not saying that it has to be fun in an austere, spartan sort of way. It doesn’t. What I am saying, though, is that if we try to do two things at once, we accomplish nothing. If we focus on one thing, though, we have a much better chance of succeeding. Leo Babauta’s [ebook on Focus][4] has much more to say about this topic, if you’re interested.

[1]: /a/2010-11-18-trial1day15/wet-web.png (spider-web)
[2]: http://calnewport.com/blog/category/tips-studying/ (Cal Newport - Study Hacks)
[3]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spaced_repetition (Wikipedia - Spaced Repetition)
[4]: http://zenhabits.net/focus-book/ (Leo Babauta - Focus)
