---
author: joshrule
date: '2011-04-18 19:58:20'
layout: post
slug: its-better-to-know-the-laws-than-ignore-them-part-1
status: publish
title: It's Better To Know the Laws Than Ignore Them, Part 1
wordpress_id: '147'
categories:
- science
---

![Chaos turns us into unthinking billiard balls - photo by juanita.laguna on
flickr.com][1]

(Note: I won't be posting Good Friday, so please expect the next post
Wednesday 27 April.)

Today, I want to discuss one of our most troubling problems: chaos.

#### The Problem of Chaos

Chaos is unpredictable confusion, and it disturbs me. Imagine a world without
rules, laws, mandates, dicta, structures, institutions, or theorems,
scientific, political, or otherwise. This world has no consistent gravity and
nothing to keep your kidneys functioning, much less the structures providing
property rights and freedom from injustice. Nothing you take for granted is
guaranteed: neither sleep, family, livable temperatures, food, a heartbeat,
nor reliable perceptions. This world is a random and unknowable place, and the
life of anything living in it is nasty, brutish, and short, gaining no
foothold and finding no safe place. For the probably brief moment anything
survives, it is utterly confused.

A world understood through chaos is a problem, and not just for our kidneys.
It leaves us no space to act effectively. Any action we take is far more
likely to fail terribly than to succeed. Our chances of doing anything,
helping anyone (or even finding anyone to help), and creating a better world
are depressingly slim. We'll most likely disintegrate long before we see any
shred of hope, beauty, truth, or goodness.

#### Isn't it Good to be Random Sometimes?

Now, some people believe that a bit of randomness from time to time is a good
thing. But, claiming that chaos is acceptable, even preferable, is generally
shallow or dishonest.

Upholding chaos is shallow when people react unthinkingly against bad rules or
rulers. It's true that evil or incompetent order should be abolished. But,
living without order is no solution. Rules and institutions are crucial to
prevent the sort of randomness where destruction and ugliness is nearly as
likely as when intentionally designed. Beauty and creation are rare wonders
which must be intentionally pursued. The solution to bad rulers and bad rules
is not to abandon order altogether, but to deliberately seek good order.

Even the admonition to practice random acts of kindness or senseless acts of
beauty is shallow and unthinking. Beauty and kindness are anything but random
noise; they are clear signals for good and for human flourishing. They require
deliberate effort and sometimes elaborate planning[^1]. To hold otherwise
is simply careless.

Upholding chaos is dishonest when people know that understanding and
exploiting rules will be hard and so convince themselves that instead of
fighting chaos, it should be accepted and even embraced. Stoics often fall
prey to this flaw; rather than seeking solutions to death and suffering,
stoicism accepts them as they come and simply bears their burdens. How much
better to fight the ignorance and chaos which cause death and suffering in the
first place. A burden avoided is one less to bear!

#### What About Good Randomness?

Now, you might argue that my discussion so far ignores the usefulness of
randomness. I'm saying that chaos is troubling because it provides bad odds
for good things. But, shouldn't we consider the successful uses of randomness?
I mean, look at free markets and genetic algorithms: they simply take random
input, evolve pretty much randomly, and often give fantastic solutions.

There are two problems with this approach. First, we don't have time to be
random. Markets and genetic algorithms work because they take thousands of
options, try them all, and let the best ones survive. Given enough time, they
act [non-deterministically][2]. But, we humans aren't so fortunate. Where a
genetic algorithm can try millions of options because of the raw computing
power at its disposal, we can try a couple options for significant decisions
and potentially a few dozens or hundreds of options for small decisions. More
baldly, genetic algorithms often move through hundreds of generations before
arriving at a solution. We only get one. Our ability to manipulate the search
space is much, much smaller.

Even taking that into account, markets and genetic algorithms aren't random.
The market maximizes value generated by trade. Genetic algorithms maximize an
individual's score on a fitness function. Neither just takes the odds but
instead exploits some feature of the world to look for good solutions to hard
problems. They exist to help us reduce the chaos and disorder in the world by
efficiently searching massive solution spaces. They do not accept or embrace
chaos. Except in a few explicit cases (i.e. random-number generators), we
build tools not to take the odds as they are or to introduce chaos, but to
combat and fight it back[^2].

#### Not Built for Random

I can't state strongly enough the danger of chaos. It requires magnificent
amounts of information to understand. Instead of predicting based on a handful
of moving pieces, a random event requires a prediction based on the infinitely
many things that may have occurred. Our brains are far too limited for that
kind of computation. Even our most powerful computers are too limited for
those kinds of decisions. Chaos gives us no way to act meaningfully. All we do
in the face of chaos is react, an unthinking billiard ball on an interstellar
pool table.

A healthy fear of chaos established, I'll write next about how that fear
motivates great science.


[^1]: Sadly, the need for goodness to be deliberate goes a long way in explaining why it often seems so rare. Living without deliberation is just easier.
[^2]: The three potentially thoughtful uses of chaos I see are security, where we obfuscate data deliberately, the study of quantum mechanics, where some sub-atomic actions are thought to be truly random, and statistics, where randomness is a simplifying assumption. And even within these fields, true randomness, true chaos, is only thought to exist or be desirable in very specific circumstances.

[1]: /a/2011-04-18-its-better-to-know-the-laws-than-ignore-them-part-1/billiard-ball.png (Chaos turns us into unthinking billiard balls - photo by juanita.laguna on flickr.com)
[2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nondeterministic_algorithm (Wikipedia Non-deterministic Algorithm)
