---
author: joshrule
date: '2011-03-16 16:51:06'
layout: post
slug: trial-3-day-19-fighting-fear-and-laziness
status: publish
title: 'Trial 3: Day 19 - Fighting Fear and Laziness'
wordpress_id: '129'
categories:
- trials
---

![Transform a flood into a trickle - photo by Billy A on flickr.com][1]

I won't be publishing a new post this Monday, because I'll be visiting with
family. Look forward to a new post next Friday.

It's day 19 of my 30-day experiment to generate 30 potent 100-word
explanations of ideas related to my research. I'm taking [keystone
concepts][2] from papers I've read, work I'm doing, and work I want to do, and
I'm polishing my understanding of those ideas into tight explanations tailored
to my view of the world. Writing them has already provided me several new
conceptual tools, but those tools aren't the only benefit. I'm noticing
welcome psychological improvements, too.

#### Fight Your Fear

We humans tend to be afraid of the unknown. We can be excited by it, too, but
the monster you don't know is usually scarier than the one you do. A new field
and its full array of jargon is a monstrous unknown. Even the work of a
particular author can be a bit threatening if they're fond of inventing new
terms. As such, it can be incredibly intimidating to make sense of a new
field. Everywhere you turn, you run up against new ideas. At times, you wonder
if you'll ever make sense of anything, including your own research. It's easy
to be overwhelmed by the feeling you're at the mercy of a field of geniuses
eager to expose your unworthiness to do great science.

I can almost guarantee that the problem isn't a pack of evil geniuses, though.
Most likely, it's actually something Cal Newport calls the [failed simulation
effect][3]. When you're starting a new line of research, you have a tough time
imagining yourself ever mastering the flood of new concepts. A big part of the
problem is you usually imagine yourself now and yourself once you know all
these concepts, but you don't spend much time imagining the path between those
two states. Because you can't picture a way to skip straight from beginning to
end, you despair.

This trial can help. Right now, it gives me two ways to process new ideas and
methodically deepen my domain knowledge. It turns a flood of new ideas into a
manageable trickle.

First, 100-word explanations help me manage ideas that aren't central to the
paper or problem in front of me. I put those on a list to revisit when there's
nothing more urgent to explain. So far, I've had plenty of time to process
these ideas and continue reading new papers.

Second, this trial deals with the central concepts on which a problem or paper
hinges, the keystone ideas. The trial gives me permission to drop everything
and spend a few hours hashing out big ideas whenever they appear. Glossing
over crucial ideas is just as bad as not reading a paper or working on a
problem at all. It's far better to learn an idea well the first time than to
skip over it for months or even years, working with only a superficial veneer
of understanding. Long-term, the big words you use in a sentence are not
nearly as impressive as the big ideas you use to explain the universe.

Either way, I'm always in control of the pace of my learning and the number of
new ideas I see at one time. The flood subsides, and all we're left with is a
pleasant stream of new ideas.

#### Find Virtue in Laziness

Few of the concepts I'm writing about this month are completely new to me;
I've learned most of them before. In many cases, I've spent hours making sense
of them and even using them. What's worse, I've learned many of these concepts
several times already. I've put in several hours not just once, but 2, 3, even
4 times, trying to make heads or tails of an idea - again.

I needed all this repetition and extra work not because I was stupid, but
because I was lazy. I tried to do the least possible work required with little
or no concept of future work. The next time I needed the concept, I may have
remembered a vague definition, but I couldn't wield the concept usefully. So
each time, I basically relearned from scratch, putting in the same several
hours to no additional benefit. That's a greedy and short-sighted laziness,
but it's incredibly easy to adopt[^1]. Even worse, because new learning
depends on understanding more basic material as well, this type of laziness
leads to a frenetic running-in-place that makes you feel important, but leaves
you woefully under-effective.

This trial encourages something I'm calling virtuous laziness[^2]. We still
want to minimize effort for a given result, but instead of doing so over the
next day or week, we think in terms of years or decades.

In this trial, I spend a few hours now learning a concept and pulling together
useful insights. Then, and this is perhaps the key step, I take time to write
these ideas down in concise language that makes sense to me. The writing
cements the idea again in my head and rephrasing it forces me to understand
rather than memorize the definition. Tying it to known concepts makes any
relearning I might need to do in the future quick and specialized to my style
of thinking. A little extra work now can make the future painless and
automatic.

With this new, much deeper understanding, I can go back to my reading and
problem-solving, not just with a superficial understanding, but with a deep
understanding that helps me get as much as possible from the work of reading
or problem-solving.

#### The Big Idea

I suppose the big psychological truth this trial pushes, and both these
examples illustrate, is that you choose how to use your time, your learning,
and even the problems available to you. You aren't slave to new material or
the demands on your time. You are master over these things.

This trial encourages you to realize that your time is valuable and worth
protecting, especially the time of a future you who is more skilled and
experienced. Learning sloppily and superficially denies that realization.
Learning carefully embraces it.

The upshot is that your work begins to flow from your choices to use your time
and intelligence a certain way. You solve problems not because you are being
forced to, but because you have chosen to, because you are eager to know more.
That leaves you a saner, more interested, and more motivated scientist. The
world needs those. Perhaps you need this trial.


[^1]: This attitude was especially common at university for me. I don't think I was learning too much, but I was learning too much for the system I had in place. Because my system couldn't handle all the new information, I cut corners.
[^2]: This sort of laziness is one of Larry Wall's _three virtues of a programmer_. The other two are impatience and hubris.

[1]: /a/2011-03-16-trial-3-day-19-fighting-fear-and-laziness/flood-to-trickle.png (Transform a flood into a trickle - photo by Billy A on flickr.com)
[2]: http://joshrule.com/blog/trial-3-day-1-rapid-fire-explanation/ (WOTS - Trial 3: Day 1 - Rapid Fire Explanation)
[3]: http://calnewport.com/blog/2010/03/26/how-to-get-into-stanford-with-bs-on-your-transcript-failed-simulations-the-surprising-psychology-of-impressiveness/ (Study Hacks: How to Get Into Stanford with B's on Your Transcript: Failed Simulations & the Surprising Psychology of Impressiveness)
