---
author: joshrule
date: '2011-01-24 18:29:02'
layout: post
slug: trial-2-day-21-deep-domain-knowledge-and-deliberate-practice
status: publish
title: 'Trial 2: Day 21 - Deep Domain Knowledge and Deliberate Practice'
wordpress_id: '96'
categories:
- trials
---

![chess also requires deep domain knowledge and deliberate practice - photo by
ranil on flickr.com][1]

Today is day 21 of my 30-day trial to use at least 15 minutes of lab time each
day to think about science and my research. Following the example of Richard
Hamming and many journaling scientists, I'm setting aside time to explicitly
consider some of the more important questions for my particular research and
in my field at large.

Each week, I report on the trial's progress and what I'm learning because of
it. Today, I want to introduce two new concepts, _deep domain knowledge_ and
_deliberate practice_, that will serve as a guide to future trials and also
tie together this trial and the [previous one][2].

These two ideas have been developing in scientific literature for decades, but
I started thinking about them again recently after reading Geoff Colvin's
_Talent is Overrated_. It's a good book, arguing persuasively that great
performance is built, not born[^1]. If you haven't read it yet, I recommend
it.

#### Trial One: Deep Domain Knowledge

One of the key ingredients to great performance in science, or any field, is
deep domain knowledge. For scientists, the phrase implies an absolute mastery
of nearly every concept in your discipline, as well as a deep understanding of
the mathematics, modeling, logic, and philosophy of science that undergird
your work. In short, deep domain knowledge is knowing your field.

For example, take the chess matches between Garry Kasparov and Deep Blue that
Colvin describes in the book. He points out that while Kasparov considered a
few dozen possible moves before each actual move, Deep Blue considered
millions every second. Still, Kasparov won 2 games of the 6-game series,
because he had a deep knowledge of chess. He knew the small collection of
moves actually worth considering in any given situation. He had a profound
mastery over openings, attacks, defenses, and closes. He knew chess. Deep
knowledge was key to his great performance as a chess player, and it's also
key to great performance in science.

That's what the last trial, reading academically for an hour each day, began
encouraging me to develop, even if I didn't know it at the time. Regular study
helps me deepen my domain knowledge in neuroscience and related fields.
Currently, I'm reading a probability textbook, because statistics are a key
part of most published science and my background there is a bit thin. The hope
is that a deeper understanding of probability and statistics will make it
easier to study others' work in neuroscience and produce more significant
results myself.

#### Deliberate Practice

Colvin establishes pretty conclusively that deep knowledge in your field is
essential to great performance. But, knowledge isn't everything. Kasparov
didn't win those games against Deep Blue just by reading books about chess. He
had to apply his knowledge in thousands of games against hundreds of opponents
and hone his skills as a chess player to a razor's edge.

We too, have to apply our knowledge. Without original ideas and new
applications, no new science happens, much less great science. But, expertly
applying a vast body of knowledge to a problem is no easy task. If it were,
most of our problems would now be solved.

Getting to a point where you can expertly apply a vast body of domain
knowledge is a difficult process, and routinely requires more than a decade of
work. That work primarily consists of repeatedly and deliberately stretching
yourself to perform beyond your previous limits. The scientific literature
calls this stretching _deliberate practice_. Colvin identifies a few key
traits that make deliberate practice crucial to great performance, which are
the following:

It's _designed_ to improve performance

You're not just spending time in your field. You're doing something very
specific to improve your abilities as a scientist, often under a [master
scientist][3] or teacher.
It's highly repeatable

Again, you're doing a single designed task and repeating it until you can do
it perfectly. You're developing a skill in isolation that can be exploited
later, while doing new science.
Feedback on results is continuously available

Without feedback it's nearly impossible to consistently improve. Try to get
feedback that's as realistic as possible. For example, practicing a conference
talk with an audience will provide much better feedback than practicing in the
mirror.
It's highly demanding mentally

This is not the mindless practice that many people engage in. It's intense,
focused preparation that trains specific skills to excellence. You're
ruthlessly culling errors in performance so that you can execute flawlessly.
It isn't much fun

Actually doing great science may be fun, but the intense focus required to
develop the necessary skills and knowledge may not always feel fun. Yet,
deliberate practice is essential to continued improvement.
  

#### Trial Two: A Glimmer of Deliberate Practice

This current trial is a tentative first step toward that sort of application.
I'm teaching myself to regularly dig for the implications of my experiments
and use my knowledge of neuroscience and science generally to push for better
explanations of the brain's inner workings.

The reason I say this trial is a _tentative_ step toward deliberate practice
is that I didn't explicitly set out to use it this way. Initially, I saw that
many productive scientists set aside time for reflection and figured that I
should too. Only now am I beginning to really understand the tie between
reflection and great science. Great work, and by extension great science,
comes from those who are experts at applying their deep knowledge. Producing
great explanations for the unknown is ultimately driven not by experiments,
but by the continued pursuit of better explanations. Coming up with a better
explanation often requires incredibly clear thinking, which doesn't come
without intense reflection[^2].

As it stands now, this trial isn't well-structured for deliberate practice.
I'm not repeating any one task. There's absolutely no useful feedback
mechanism. And, I often feel tired or distracted and don't bring anything like
ruthless intensity to my reflections. That was certainly the case today.

#### Moving Forward

But, for the remainder of this trial, and looking forward to future
experiments, I want to intentionally apply these principles of deliberate
practice. If deliberate practice is the underlying mechanism for moving from
average to great performance, sign me up. That's what Way of the Scholar is
all about.

For this trial, I plan to use my remaining thinking time to develop several
alternative hypotheses for the current results in my simulation which I can
then submit to my PI for his feedback and interpretation. I'll pick what I
consider the most likely one, and check it against his opinion. Because we're
constantly running simulations and reviewing data sets, this would be a
regular task allowing nearly a hundred repetitions in just the next few
months. Over time, I should become increasingly skilled at generating multiple
hypotheses and selecting the most likely one.

Yet again, we see evidence that doing great science is not a random process.
It's something which can be understood, a goal which can be obtained.
Explaining how is why this site exists.


[^1]: That's a key tenet of Cal Newport's writing, too, and I again encourage you to spend some time learning from his [books][4] and [blog][5].
[^2]:  I've re-written the paragraph this note comes from at least a half-dozen times. Even an explanation as simple as that one takes time and revision to get right. How much more so for an intricate facet of string theory or neural signal transmission.

[1]: /a/2011-01-24-trial-2-day-21-deep-domain-knowledge-and-deliberate-practice/chess.png (chess also requires deep domain knowledge and deliberate practice - photo by ranil on flickr.com)
[2]: /index.html#posts (WOTS - archive)
[3]: http://joshrule.com/blog/apprenticeship-get-started-in-science/ (WOTS - Apprenticeship: Get Started in Science)
[4]: http://calnewport.com/books (Cal Newport - Books)
[5]: http://calnewport.com/blog (Cal Newport - StudyHacks)
