---
author: joshrule
date: '2011-03-11 17:26:19'
layout: post
slug: the-right-tool-for-the-job
status: publish
title: The Right Tool for the Job
wordpress_id: '127'
categories:
- science
---

![You need the right tools to clean these (or even build them) - photo by
Darren Krape on flickr.com][1]

I've talked about bias several times recently, and it's easy to forget that
bias is nothing more than a tendency toward one belief over others. As we've
already seen, [bias makes science possible][2], and for that alone, it's
critical that we can manipulate it easily.

But, another central theme on Way of the Scholar is that the conceptual tools
we have at our disposal dramatically shape the science we can do. Good tools
make great science easier, perhaps even possible. The [right tools][3] help us
see the world in a way perfectly shaped for solving the problems of our field.

The critical connection I want to make today is that **tools, physical or
conceptual, manipulate our bias**. The tools we have available to us and use
regularly affect the sorts of problems we notice and solve. [Maslow's
phrase][4] has become a classic, _If all you have is a hammer, everything is a
nail_. Your tendency with one tool is to notice only problems requiring that
tool and to solve all problems in the same way, with that tool. A one-tool
scientist is a one-trick show, not a force for discovery and explanation.

As you add tools, you add the ability to see new sorts of problems and
solutions. Adopting new tools and learning to ignore old ones pushes you
toward certain beliefs and away from others, shifting your biases.

This connection between tools and bias creates two major problems. It can make
some solutions more difficult to find than they need to be, and it can make
some problems and solutions impossible to see at all.

#### The Right Tool Makes it Easy

First, if tools shape the way we think about the problems we solve, the wrong
tools can make progress difficult. As an undergraduate, I often spent hours
poring over lecture notes while writing up proofs for my theory courses. It
wasn't just that I was interested in the material, though I was. I knew that
until I connected the right techniques to the right proofs, most of my
homework would be mind-numbingly hard. Typically, the only other solutions I
could think of were brute force drudgery, equivalent to cleaning the Great
Pyramids with a toothbrush. Making good use of a regularly expanding toolset
requires careful thinking and a good deal of experimentation. But, that
investment enables you to solve a broader set of problems much more quickly.

Josh Bongard has done [some fascinating work][5] showing that sometimes, it's
not even just the tools we use, but the order we use them in, that matters.
He's created a set of virtual four-legged creatures that learn to walk. When
beginning with a 'mature' set of legs, like you'd see on a cat or dog, the
creatures can learn to walk, but it takes a long time and a great deal of
experimentation. When they begin with splayed legs like a centipede's, they
quickly learn to move. Then, it's a short jump to legs that are slightly more
upright, like a reptile, and a second jump to mammalian legs. The right set of
tools, in the right order, makes it much easier to solve the complex problem
of walking.

#### The Right Tool Makes it Possible

Second, we must realize that some tools are so familiar and natural to use
that we forget they are even tools.

Take language, for example. When we review our conceptual toolbox, few of us
consider the language or languages we speak. But, not all languages are
equivalent. In fact, the language you speak has the potential to dramatically
shape the way you perceive the world.

At least [one aboriginal language][6] has no concept of left, right, forward,
or backward. Instead, it uses cardinal directions like north, south, east, and
west. To an English speaker like myself, it appears that its speakers have
developed an otherworldly ability to navigate and orient themselves in the
world. Actually, the available tools just push them to think a certain way.
Instead of perceiving themselves as the anchor around which the world spins
and moves, they see themselves as spinning and moving in an absolutely-
oriented world. And they become very good at it.

Examples like this one abound and not just in language choice. Mediums for
communication, small defaults in the programs we use, and thousands of other
unconscious choices affect the way we see the world. When we lose sight of
these tools, especially those as powerful as language, we forget that other
possibilities may exist. We might not even be capable of thinking of the right
solution, and we wouldn't even know it.

#### Is There a Solution?

If tools influence our choices so much, how do we go about finding the right
ones? And after that, how do we recognize when none of the existing tools are
sufficient? How did Newton know that before his kinematic equations would work
properly, he'd need to produce calculus?

Those are tough questions, and I don't have a complete answer. But, here are a
few thoughts.

First, you need to remember that your goal is great science, not the largest
toolset. Adopting new conceptual and physical tools is incredibly useful, but
only if you actually use them.

Second, you need to intimately understand the problem at hand. You may think
you understand your problem well, but try writing it out. Now, try writing it
out in in less than 100 words. Try explaining it to non-scientific friends.
Try explaining it at least a half-dozen different ways. Talk to people from
different scientific backgrounds. Other people know tools you won't and can
share them with you and perhaps frame your problem in a light you never would
have seen alone. Search your field to see if anyone has done anything remotely
related to your work. If so, what tools did they use? Actually trying to solve
a problem, even with limited understanding, can also highlight
misunderstandings. Whatever you do, try to clarify what it is you are actually
trying to accomplish. Often, the wrong tools are applied to a problem simply
because we don't understand the problem we're trying to solve.

Third, regularly invest time in learning new tools. Study books. Study math.
Take up programming. Try a new experimental technique. Study the habits and
work of famous scientists and artists. Take up some physical hobby. Make
things, and tear things apart. These sorts of things slowly ease the
restraints a limited toolset places on your ability to see problems and their
solutions.

Those three points aren't exhaustive, and I'm sure I'll have much more to say
on this subject in future posts. But, applying them will get you much further
than solving problems with mindless brute force. Otherwise, you may not just
lag a bit behind, but sit dumbfounded that certain kinds of thinking could
even exist.

Way of the Scholar is largely about exploiting the relationship between tools
and bias to find the habits and thought patterns common to doing great
science. From there, my hope is that you will be equipped to tweak these tools
to your own field and do some of the science that the world desperately needs.

[1]: /a/2011-03-11-the-right-tool-for-the-job/pyramid.png (You need the right tools to clean these (or even build them) - photo by Darren Krape on flickr.com)
[2]: http://joshrule.com/blog/science-needs-bias/ (WOTS - Science Needs Bias)
[3]: http://joshrule.com/blog/trial-3-day-11-painting-your-way-to-better-science/ (WOTS - Trial 3: Day 11 - Painting Your Way to Better Science)
[4]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_the_instrument (Wikipedia - Law of the Instrument)
[5]: http://www.wired.com/gadgetlab/2011/01/walking-robots-gallery/ (WIRED - Josh Bongard Robots)
[6]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_relativity (Wikipedia - Linguistic Relativity)
