---
author: joshrule
published: false
date: '2011-04-08 07:42:42'
layout: post
slug: seeing-past-time-and-space-part-3
status: publish
title: Seeing Past Time and Space - Part 3
wordpress_id: '140'
categories:
- science
---

![Can we experience the non-physical like we can the physical? - photo by Dru!
on flickr.com][1]

[Random acts are rarely great][2], so [we need a strong understanding of how
reality works][3] if we want a shot at doing great things. That reality is
partly physical is pretty much uncontested, but claims of the non-physical are
more controversial, especially in science. This past week, [I discussed][4]
how the unlikeliness of the universe and the violation of known physical laws
make the non-physical more probable than not. Today, I want to look at the
question, _what can science say about this non-physical reality?_

Sadly, I don't know all that science can explain of the non-physical, just as
I don't know all that science can explain of the brain or sub-atomic
particles. We're constantly pushing the boundaries of science further than
they've ever been pushed. Because the non-physical is relatively unexplored in
science, the potential for new understanding is particularly vast. So, instead
of predicting what science will discover about the non-physical, I'm going to
lay out two ways scientists can continue to investigate it. They can do
something old, or they can do something new.

#### Something Old

The two pieces of evidence I shared last time weren't actually non-physical.
Both were just as physical as the air you're breathing right now. The
constants needed to sustain life come not from the ether but from observation
of ourselves as human beings and the structure of planets and atoms. A
universe like this one has to be finely tuned to exist as it does physically.
And, when physical laws are violated, they are by definition physical
violations. Jesus of Nazareth was physically dead and physically came back to
life.

But, the implications of these physical observations are non-physical. The
universe is preposterously unlikely without some constructive guidance, and
physical laws can't be violated unless something outside those laws exists to
violate them. These physical observations strongly suggest the non-physical.

We can use that same pattern to continue learning about the non-physical.
Physical patterns that demand a larger reality than just the physical universe
can help us build a stronger understanding of the non-physical, how it relates
to the physical, and how reality as a whole is structured.

For example, we could push observations of blatantly violated physical laws
further by exploring exactly which laws were broken, to what extent, and under
what circumstances. By piecing these events and observations together, we can
build a more coherent story about the ties between the physical and the non-
physical. We should also consider evidence showing that the rules were never
violated, because counter-examples are just as crucial to the truth as
supporting evidence.

Whatever particular problems are examined, our study of the non-physical will
be two-fold. First, we need to keep doing basic science, pushing for better
understanding of the fundamental laws of the universe. We learn more every
year but have much more still to learn. This work will be the fastest and
least controversial, because nearly all scientists accept this role for
science. We want to understand how the universe works.

Second, we also need to increase the intensity of our search for oddities,
violations, and stupendously exaggerated probabilities that question the lone
existence of the physical. The better we understand the physical world, the
better we can see gaps left for the non-physical, gaps which have been paid
too little attention.

So, large parts of this work will belong to historians and others working to
understand events that have long since passed. We're not guaranteed that the
most unusual things are still to happen. Remember, though, that just because
someone is analyzing data that's already been collected doesn't mean it's not
science. Science explains the universe by testing it and excluding all but the
most likely explanations.

#### Something New

The method I just described helps us explain the non-physical indirectly. How
the physical world has reacted and continues to react to the non-physical can
teach us a great deal about the non-physical. But, this sort of learning is a
bit diluted. Something else we need to consider is, _do humans have the
capacity to experience the non-physical directly?_

We easily experience the physical, and trying to ignore it is ill-advised.
Nearly every moment of every day, we are aware of the physical universe. We
breathe its air and drink its water. Our very bodies are part of this physical
world. Everywhere we turn, the physical comes with us.

Because of our nearly direct experience of the physical, we easily learn about
it[^1]. Our questions can be answered simply by reaching out and touching,
tasting, smelling, listening, and looking. If we had some similar way to
experience the non-physical, it would be remarkably helpful for understanding
the non-physical.

For scientists, this issue strikes me as unresolved. Most of us haven't seemed
that interested in the non-physical, and most of the attention it has gotten
has been muddled and pseudo-scientific at best. As a result, we don't even
know enough about the non-physical to design good experiments. If there's one
way scientists could dramatically improve our understanding of the non-
physical, it would be to establish whether or not we have non-physical
experiences in any way resembling our physical experience. Once that's worked
out, we can either move back to indirect study (if our experience is
unreliable or non-existent), or design tests exploiting our non-physical
experiences.

#### What Are We Afraid Of?

Again, I know this question sits on the war-torn border between science and
quackery. At one time, so also did chemistry, astronomy, anatomy,
neuroscience, and even computer science. New fields are often controversial
until they are shown fruitful. But, if good tests can be found, they give us
the opportunity to significantly advance our understanding of the non-
physical. And, the potential leap in our understanding of reality is worth
pushing rigorous explanation to the very limit. Anything less is fear, not
science.


[^1]: Some philosophers argue that we, the conscious self, really only experience the sensations and thoughts of the conscious self. That is, our consciousness doesn't reach out and touch things; our bodies does and reports those sensations to the brain which relays them to our consciousness. In that sense, all we ever experience are intangible ideas. We never actually experience the physical world.

[1]: /a/2011-04-08-seeing-past-time-and-space-part-3/stream1.png (Can we experience the non-physical like we can the physical? - photo by Dru! on flickr.com)
[2]: http://joshrule.com/blog/great-by-design/ (WOTS - Great by Design)
[3]: http://joshrule.com/blog/seeing-past-time-and-space-part-1/ (WOTS - Seeing Past Time and Space - Part 1)
[4]: http://joshrule.com/blog/seeing-past-time-and-space-part-2/ (WOTS - Seeing Past Time and Space - Part 3)

