---
author: joshrule
date: '2011-03-07 18:50:35'
layout: post
slug: curiosity-does-yours-make-you-useless
status: publish
title: 'Curiosity: Does Yours Make You Useless?'
wordpress_id: '125'
categories:
- science
- strategy
---

![Only by directing your curiosity, like a flowing river, does it become
useful - photo by mbsurf on flickr.com][1]

Even though I'm in the middle of my third trial for Way of the Scholar, that
doesn't mean I've stopped learning from the first two. Over the past couple of
weeks, I've learned a crucial lesson because of trial one: curiosity must be
trained.

#### Curiosity

I'm curious. I read voraciously, build things, tear things apart, love asking
questions and want to know more, experience more, feel more. Whether it's the
science of truffle-making or the art of hacking [Scheme][2] or even something
as mundane as the backstory of an actor in a recent movie, I love to learn.
Worlds I hadn't even considered before open up right before my eyes when I
discover something new. These are the moments that make my heart race.

Trial one was wonderful, because it gave me an hour each day to dig into
something new. I thrilled to learn that the very limitations of our nervous
system are the same things that make us such capable creatures. The balanced
tension exhibited in an animal's nervous system is beautiful. It was
invigorating to learn about it in such a concentrated and regular way.

This zeal for knowledge and discovery is perfect for science, where it can be
a long slog to reveal the critical connections driving an explanation. If
discovery doesn't nourish and revive you, and if you don't have a burning
desire to understand, it's hard to stay motivated.

But, we must cultivate the right sorts of curiosity. It comes in several
varieties, and I'm learning that too many destroy our chances of giving the
world great science.

It's easy to adopt the habit of learning consumptively, for example. Ever the
student, you fail to teach, produce, or change the world at all through what
you've learned. You just soak things up, like a sponge. Instead of a river
bringing life and help to those you contact, you become instead like the Dead
Sea, a useless, lifeless place.

I've exhibited this sort of unconstrained curiosity in many forms and for many
reasons. I've mindlessly and compulsively read news and blogs, paranoid that I
might fall behind my peers and appear foolish or unconcerned. I've put off
even starting my work for the possibility that it may not ever amount to
anything great. That left me in the gathering phase, always looking for just
one more helpful piece of information before starting, effectively creating my
own doom. Sometimes, I've been so fascinated by the desire to know that I've
just flitted from topic to topic, always stopping short of anything
significant, but always learning something interesting at each stop along the
way. Trying to do it all, I've done nothing.

#### Rein in Your Curiosity

Whatever drives it, I can tell you that unbridled and untrained, curiosity
won't produce great science. We must learn to be curious in a disciplined way.
Sure, we cast the net widely when searching for an interesting field, but
eventually, we must draw it closed around something. And, we must be willing
to pursue the questions in that net even at the expense of other potentially
intensely interesting things. I'm at this stage now, and it's a bit painful.

The world is a great expanse of fascinating questions, and I want to explore
them all. I just want to know! So, I have to continually remind myself that if
I can provide great answers to even a few questions, I will be of far greater
service to the world than if I constantly flit from one to another.
Flightiness leaves me useless as a scientist. No less valuable as a person,
but a useless scientist all the same.

Those words probably sound harsh, but again, I want to be as helpful as I can.
Pulling punches on this sort of thing isn't helpful. I've spent years jumping
around like a kid in a candy shop, but too nervous to actually choose
something. I've gotten very good at skimming blog posts, watching TV shows,
and even reading books. But, to commit years of my life to working on a few
select problems when the entire world beckons around me? It seems absolutely
ludicrous. What if I choose the wrong field? What if everyone realizes I'm
just an imposter? What if I'm just not cut out to do great science? What if I
get so sucked into my work that I ignore everything else I know to be
important? What ifâ€¦?

Over these last few weeks of reading and thinking and working in the lab, I've
started to realize something: commitment to a single field may terrify me, but
ultimately provides worlds of reward scarcely conceivable when I was bouncing
from field to field. Even after just a few months, I know that statement's
true. I've never understood a problem even half as deeply as I do my current
research, nor have I been nearly as interested in the solution. I've rarely
been able to balance learning with building and testing new things as well as
I am now, and I'm getting better every week. I am so grateful that I've chosen
to pursue this work, and I cannot wait until I have the perspective of years
on my side.

#### There's More to Life Than Science

I don't want to be so short-sighted, though, that you hear me encouraging
obsessive devotion to a singular, all-encompassing interest. That simply isn't
human. We must nourish our minds and bodies with many things. I read novels,
poetry, and non-fiction of all sorts. I watch movies. I listen to good music.
I love good conversation. I'm always up for camping deep in the wilderness or
touring a big city. I like to eat good food and exercise hard. Beyond simply
keeping ourselves sane, these things often form odd connections that solve the
most difficult problems in our work.

But, unless we direct our curiosity primarily to a few select interests, and
probably just one or two major scientific interests, we won't be prepared to
make those connections or to use them to explain the mysteries of the
universe. We will have little or no impact on science. Other interests may
have their place, but while we are doing science, we must ruthlessly direct
our curiosity back into our work, ignoring nearly everything else.

So again, I encourage you: if you wish to do great science, gather the courage
to commit to a field, and deliberately stoke an unquenchable curiosity for it.
Dive into it intensely for a few hours each day, studying under a master,
explaining, experimenting, and reading as needed. Know everything there is to
know about your field, and learn to organize your knowledge around it. Feel
free to explore other things in your spare time, but when you are doing
science, pursue your work relentlessly and exclusively. Great science requires
many things of us, but among the foremost is a commitment to actually doing
it.

[1]: /a/2011-03-07-curiosity-does-yours-make-you-useless/river.png (Only by directing your curiosity, like a flowing river, does it become useful - photo by mbsurf on flickr.com)
[2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scheme_(programming_language) (Wikipedia - Scheme)
