---
author: joshrule
published: false
date: '2011-03-30 17:37:23'
layout: post
slug: seeing-past-time-and-space-part-2
status: publish
title: Seeing Past Time and Space - Part 2
wordpress_id: '136'
categories:
- science
---

![Is there anything other than physical reality? - photo by Trodel on
flickr.com][1]

(Note: This post continues to grow faster than I can write. Today, we'll be
looking at one of two questions I posed [last time][2]. Next Monday, I'll post
my closing observations for my 100-word explanation trial, and next Friday,
I'll write about the second question I've posed.)

[Last time][2], I showed that science is limited by our ability to experience
the world around us. We cannot test what we cannot experience. That means we
may be unable to explain or understand all reality through science. If
anything is basically non-physical, science may not be able to explain it and
place it in reality. That's a problem. Without a good explanation of reality
and how we fit into it, our actions are random at best. Randomness is no way
to lead an effective life.

So, I ended the last post by asking two questions:

*  Is there reality beyond the physical, and how can we be sure of our answer?
*  What can science say about this reality, if it exists?

I'll take on the first question today, and dive into the second question next
Friday. As a point of terminology, I'll refer to any supposed non-physical
realm as simply the non-physical. Unnatural and supernatural both have
unhelpful connotations.

#### Answering by Assumption

The simplest response to the question of whether non-physical reality exists
is to assume that it doesn't. In that case, the existence of a merely physical
world becomes a basic part of our universe, just like the existence of
[universal laws that can be known][3]. Because we've already made these other
assumptions, this one isn't a big leap. It's just another assumption.

What's more, it's a simplifying assumption. Instead of having to tease out
exactly how a physical and non-physical world might interact, we can simply
argue that all we have to explain is the physical world and its interactions
with itself. Everything we experience, we'd argue, can all be reduced to the
most basic particles that exist and the laws that govern them. Arguing this
way neatly side-steps any difficulties the non-physical might introduce, such
as how the two realms interact without totally invalidating the laws of the
universe or the laws of non-physical reality.

Sticking to the simplest explanation is a long-respected scientific tradition.
As I've mentioned before, [Occam's Razor][4] is one of the most celebrated
biases in all of science. But, as desirable as it is, a simpler solution isn't
necessarily more correct than a complex solution. What we actually want is a
solution that's as simple as possible, but no simpler. That's what Occam's
Razor promotes: explanations which aren't needlessly complex.

The universe has a minimal collection of laws describing its actions. If we
remove one of that collection, we can no longer explain everything. Trying to
simplify those laws any further just isn't possible without diminishing our
ability to explain reality. So, if a non-physical world does or could exist,
denying it by assumption arbitrarily denies our ability to understand an
enormous amount of truth about the universe. That seems like a bad move.

We could take the opposite position and just assume that a non-physical world
does exist. But now, we face the reverse problem. We may be arbitrarily adding
to the complexity of our explanations without adding significant explanatory
power. Assuming a non-physical realm won't increase our understanding of
reality if such a realm doesn't actually exist. If reality is entirely
physical, explaining it by resorting to the non-physical is comically foolish.

So, we could just assume or deny a non-physical world, depending on a flipped
coin or some desirable trait that one or the other gives. But, if there is
some meaningful evidence promoting one assumption or the other, we should
consider it, and base our decision on that evidence instead.

Let's start with the expansion of science.

#### The Rise of Science

One of the simplest pieces of evidence for or against the non-physical is the
prodigious expansion of science over the last four or five centuries. From
well before Newton's time through the mid-nineteenth century, science was
called [natural philosophy][5]. Because both science and philosophy seek to
understand and explain the universe, they were often practiced by the same
group of people. So, science was seen as just a specialization, an extension
of philosophy.

Eventually, people began to realize that the work of science fundamentally
differed from other styles of philosophy in that science relied on
experimental tests and eventually Bayesian probability to select its
explanations. Anything could be proposed, but if it could not be tested, or
could not be shown more or less likely some other way, it was not science.

But, because we lacked many of the necessary tools, science began with a
limited scope. Much of what we now study through science was considered
impossible to test or explain. These subjects were instead studied without
tests, and were considered purely philosophical. We simply devised interesting
theories and choose the ones we thought made the most intuitive sense.

Over time, we've developed better tools and discovered new ways to test our
ideas. Fields like cosmology, astronomy, anatomy, psychology, and neuroscience
are now part of science because we've found ways to test their claims and show
them more or less likely. The things which are left for philosophy to study
are largely those things we have not discovered ways to test or explain more
rigorously through science[^1].

Many argue that the only reason claims of the non-physical still have to be
considered is that we haven't pushed science far enough yet. Eventually we
will, and it will be shown that absolutely everything can be explained in
merely physical terms. So, there will be no need for a non-physical reality,
and it will be shown to have been a fantasy from the start.

#### Induction Only Goes So Far

The argument from the expansion of science is a basic piece of induction.
Consider all the possible fields of interest to both science and philosophy.
At the start, philosophy held them all and science didn't exist independently.
Over time, many of those fields have become primarily scientific. That trend
hasn't slowed much and may still be accelerating. So, some conclude it will
not stop at all, and science will eventually explain everything as purely
physical.

That argument's a bit sloppy on three counts.

First, science does not automatically assume that only the physical exists and
that a non-physical world is simply a delusional fantasy. That's exactly why
I'm writing this post: to highlight what reasons exist for assuming a purely
physical reality or one with a non-physical component, too. Otherwise, we
blindly assume [methodological naturalism][6].

Second, it's remarkable that we have been able to explain so much of the
physical world in terms of itself. Science has discovered some truly
remarkable things about the universe. But science can provide no absolute
guarantee that these explanations are the best possible explanations. If
assuming reality is both physical and non-physical provides better
explanations, then we must assume a non-physical world exists. Science exists
to provide the best possible explanations of reality. If those explanations
include a non-physical realm, we would be foolish and stubborn to ignore it.

Third, an inductive argument like the one above is not guaranteed to be
correct. If we show some areas cannot be well-explained without assuming some
sort of non-physical reality, we provide a counter-example to the inductive
argument and it falls apart, or at least must adapt to deal with the
counterexample.

In the next two sections, I'll present two potentially powerful
counterexamples.

#### The Anthropic Principle

You and I exist, and we live in a universe that supports our existence. I
don't mean that the universe is actively trying to make our lives better. I
mean that the conditions of the universe are such that we can exist. Things
like the amount of mass lost in a single fusion reaction in the core of a
star, the strength of gravity, and even the number of spatial dimensions all
are set in such a way that if they were nudged one way or the other, our lives
and the lives of most living things on earth would be impossible.

The fact that you and I exist is incredibly unlikely. All sorts of constants
in the universe have to be precisely set for the universe to have any chance
of sustaining life, much less intelligent life. By some counts, there are more
than 100 such constants, and the overall probability that they all exist in
one universe is less than 1 in \(10^{10^{123}}\). Considering that a typical
estimate for mathematical impossibility is around 1 in \(10^{50}\), the chance
of our universe existing the way it does is ludicrously low[^2].

These ideas have been given a name: the Anthropic Principle. Basically it
says, _if we exist to observe the universe, then we must live in a universe
perfectly configured to support the sort of life doing the observing (in this
case, carbon-based life)_.

On the face of it, the anthropic principle doesn't seem all that exciting. In
fact, it's a tautology, something that must be true by definition. That's
okay, because the interesting part is not the principle itself but its
implications. The fact that we live in a universe whose existence is
unfathomably unlikely demands some sort of explanation.

Some claim that perhaps only universes that can support intelligent life can
exist. Others claim that our universe is one of an infinite number of
universes, all of which exist in some larger Universe. Still others claim that
some underlying principle of this particular universe constrains it to support
life.

Ultimately, none of these ideas is very satisfying. The first seems arbitrary
and unsupported. The second unleashes such a massive set of problems that most
people devoted to a purely physical universe won't even consider it as
anything more than science-fiction. And, the third is again, arbitrary and
unsupported. They're all grasping at straws for which we have no evidence
other than that intelligent life exists in the universe. A non-physical
explanation is at least as supportable as any of these claims, and more so
given the next piece of evidence.

#### Gaps in the Wall

The second major piece of evidence for the existence of the non-physical is
the obvious violation of an otherwise known physical law. Remember that
science cannot prove its theories correct, no matter how many positive
examples we have. But, a single counterexample can prove the theory incorrect,
or at least incomplete. If some trusted physical law were clearly and
blatantly violated in a singular, one-off event, we would need to adapt that
law, or some more basic law, to accommodate the violation.

One way to do that would be to simply introduce some new clause into the law
saying that under the exact and unrepeatable conditions of our one-off
violation, a violation can occur. Without more substantial theoretical
grounding, that seems a bit _ad hoc_. It seems stronger to say that our
current framework is too limited; the physical realm alone is not enough to
explain the clear violation of otherwise uncontested physical laws.

In that case, it makes sense to introduce a better framework, one allowing
these sorts of unique violations. The most straightforward is that something
exists outside the physical universe which tangibly interacts with it and can
violate known physical laws.

Again, this type of argument only works if we can find a singular, non-
repeatable event that clearly violates some of our most trusted scientific
laws. It doesn't work for repeatedly exposed gaps in scientific theories which
simply need shoring up.

The clearest example I know of such a violation is the resurrection of Jesus
of Nazareth. I'm not making any claims about his deity or moral teaching here.
I'm simply pointing out that the resurrection of a human being from death (and
not from some swoon or drug-induced death-like state) violates our most basic
understanding of biology. Living things do not die, decay for a few days, and
come back to life. Yet, the resurrection of Jesus Christ is well-documented.
For some of the clearest discussion I know of the evidence regarding Jesus'
death and resurrection, see William Lane Craig's articles at [Reasonable
Faith][7] or the chapter from the [_Blackwell Companion to Natural
Theology_][8][^3].

#### Conclusion

At this point, I encourage you to spend time reflecting. Don't just let what
I've written bounce off you. And, don't just absorb it as a body of facts. Try
to explore some of the implications of these arguments. The universe is such
an unlikely occurrence that you and I should both be going wide-eyed with
amazement to realize that we actually exist. And, we live in a world where
clear violations of trusted physical laws have been observed and well-
documented.

If you accept those two things, it seems foolish to claim that the physical
universe is all there is. At the very least, something outside the physical
realm can cause violations of physical laws, and something has exerted some
influence to bring about the ordered universe we know. They may not be the
same something, but they're definitely not physical.

If that's true, then some of reality is non-physical, and we know that because
of how it has affected our physical world. Now, we need to consider how
science should relate to the non-physical. We need to figure out what science
can say about this expanded reality. That's what I'll be looking at in the
post next Friday. In the meantime, I'll be closing up my current 30-day trial
of writing 100-word explanations about the concepts in my research.


[^1]: There are probably some fields of philosophy which still exist not because testing techniques don't exist or couldn't easily be found, but because no scientist has yet decided it's worth their time to get involved in the field.
[^2]: These figures come from the [Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy][9].
[^3]: Arguments from the Anthropic Principle and the violation of known laws aren't the only support for the non-physical. For more, see _The Blackwell Companion to Natural Theology_.

[1]: /a/2011-03-30-seeing-past-time-and-space-part-2/nebula.png (Is there anything other than physical reality? - photo by Trodel on flickr.com)
[2]: http://joshrule.com/blog/seeing-past-time-and-space-part-1/ (WOTS - Seeing Past Time and Space - Part 1)
[3]: http://joshrule.com/blog/when-in-doubt-demand-an-explanation/ (WOTS - When in Doubt, Demand an Explanation)
[4]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occams_razor (Wikipedia - Occam's Razor)
[5]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_philosophy (Wikipedia - Natural Philosophy)
[6]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Methodological_naturalism (Wikipedia - Methodological Naturalism)
[7]: http://reasonablefaith.org (Reasonable Faith)
[8]: http://www.amazon.com/Blackwell-Companion-Natural-Theology/dp/1405176571/ (Blackwell Companion to Natural Theology)
[9]: http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/teleological-arguments/ (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy - Teleological Arguments for God's Existence)
