---
author: joshrule
date: '2011-02-21 19:26:14'
layout: post
slug: sameness-in-science-the-bias-of-uniformity
status: publish
title: 'Sameness in Science: The Bias of Uniformity'
wordpress_id: '116'
categories:
- science
---

![Uniformity helped me learn to ski - photo by emerson12 on flickr.com][1]

Imagine a world with [laws that we could know][2] but in which those laws were
constantly changing. That sentence doesn't seem to hold any blatant
contradictions, right? I can imagine a world where Newton's mechanics work for
a while but are suddenly replaced by new laws for how objects move and act. I
can imagine a world where 1+1 equals 2 sometimes and 3 sometimes. Laws change
frequently in governments, so why not in the universe as well?

There's a key difference. Laws that are changed by governments are changed
like scientific explanations are changed - to better meet our goals for doing
science and having governments, respectively. We cannot change the laws of the
universe to meet our goals, though. If the laws of the universe change, the
fundamental nature of some thing or class of things is also changing. Our
formal explanations may or may not shift accordingly, but underneath them,
reality itself would be different.

If we lived in a world where the laws of the universe constantly changed, that
world would be indistinguishable from one without laws. If the laws changed on
a regular basis, those changes would need to be random, or else they'd be
described by some deeper set of laws.

So, assuming the universe has laws also assumes that those laws are constant.
The two [biases][3] we've already discussed, that the universe has laws and
that those laws can be known, imply a third bias - uniformity. It's a
corollary to those first two biases, and it's important enough to our every
day work as scientists that we need to consider it carefully.

#### What is Uniformity?

Explicitly, the bias of uniformity holds that **the laws of the universe are
constant** across all time, energy, matter, and space. They don't differ from
galaxy to galaxy, day to day, or quark to quark. Momentum on earth is no
different from momentum on Gallifrey. To be clear, uniformity doesn't imply
sameness across scales. It doesn't require, for instance, that Newtonian
gravity be perfect for quarks, baseballs, and supernovas. It just requires
that the law works for all baseballs in standard Newtonian settings.

What happens if we give up uniformity and allow the laws to shift across the
universe? As I've already pointed out, we basically lose the laws entirely.
We'll need many more scientists than we have now to properly explain
everything. Instead of deciphering a law once and moving on to something else,
we'll need armies of scientists describing phenomena in each pocket of time
and space, trying them across all sorts of different combinations of matter
and energy.

Losing uniformity also means we lose the ability to predict and explain.
Without uniformity, we can no longer assume that current explanations apply in
the past or future or across the galaxy. We can conclude no more than we have
actually observed, and we certainly cannot extrapolate our observations to
include anything we haven't seen yet. Without uniformity, we lose the ability
to explain - we lose the ability to do science.

Without uniformity, our accumulation of useful bias would drastically slow.
Science would become even harder to generalize and even more rife with
qualifiers. Publication would be ridiculous, because papers would read like
news articles instead of general explanations. They'd simply describe the
state of the physical world in one very precise location in time and space and
would provide no generality. They would only catalog what has happened and
could provide no way to fight the unknown.

Uniformity allows the set of laws to remain fairly small. Once we've explained
gravity in one place, we've basically explained it everywhere for everything.
We may tweak our explanation over time to reflect new discoveries, but we
won't need infinitely many differing explanations. We just need one.

#### Why spend time talking about it?

But, uniformity isn't just theoretically interesting. It has significant
practical application as well.

First, uniformity helps you live a sane and enjoyable life. I learned to ski
this weekend, and if the laws of the universe were constantly changing as I
moved down the mountain, there's no way I would have made any progress. But,
aching joints and injured pride aside, I did learn how to ski. A huge part of
that success is that at every moment, I relied on the snow, my skis, my legs,
and a thousand other things to act a certain way. I depended quite explicitly
on the sameness of these things from run to run. Because they were, uniformity
let me have a lot of fun this weekend! Without uniformity, you'd have a hard
time convincing me to move, much less ski or do science.

Second, uniformity lets you do better science faster. With it, you apply the
work of others to your research, even if they worked centuries ago or in
different fields. No matter where or when you work, the laws remain the same.
By the same token, your work can be used by others someday as well, including
the future you. Uniformity permits progress and the iterative search for
better explanations.

Third, uniformity forces you to explain differences in the results of your
experiments. If you run an experiment one day, and repeat it another, you
should get the same results. If you don't, you've failed to control something
in the way you've run the experiment or in the environment around it. Either
way, you don't get to chalk different outcomes up to the whims of the
universe. You've assumed the universe doesn't have whims. It has laws, and
those laws apply everywhere and to everything, including your experiments.

#### Why talk about bias at all?

The major reason I'm running a series on bias is so we have some idea of what
we're even trying to do as scientists. These biases set the rules for the game
of science, marking boundaries and pointing out useful loopholes. Knowing
these biases will help us do better science, just like the rules of chess help
players create better games. Until we know the field of play, progress can
only be random.

More personally, I want to be clear what I am and am not assuming. The more
bias we accumulate, the more constrained we are to move in a certain
direction. So, I want good bias to push me toward good explanations. And, I
want to avoid bad bias that rules out the best explanations. I'm using this
series to find biases in science which are necessary, and to pick out those
which are merely customary. I may end up adopting many of the customary biases
as well, but at least I'll know they're optional.

[1]: /a/2011-02-21-sameness-in-science-the-bias-of-uniformity/ski-slope2.png (Uniformity helped me learn to ski - photo by emerson12 on flickr.com)
[2]: http://joshrule.com/blog/when-in-doubt-demand-an-explanation/ (WOTS - When In Doubt, Demand An Explanation)
[3]: http://joshrule.com/blog/science-needs-bias/ (WOTS - Science Needs Bias)

