---
author: joshrule
date: '2011-02-11 16:53:37'
layout: post
slug: when-in-doubt-demand-an-explanation
status: publish
title: When in Doubt, Demand an Explanation
wordpress_id: '111'
categories:
- science
---

![Even in the toughest times, the universe has laws - photo by c@rljones on
flickr.com][1]

(Note: Today, I'm continuing an ongoing series on bias in science. Read the
[first post][2])

Science depends on just a handful of biases, the most basic of which are
captured in the [scientific method][3]. Of those captured biases, two outstrip
all the others as foundational, and science has only been helpful because
we've assumed the following:

*  **The universe has laws**
*  **Those laws can be known**

#### The Universe has Laws

First, we're claiming the universe isn't fundamentally random. Instead, there
is a regularity to the universe which can be abstracted into laws describing
and [explaining everything][4] that exists or happens.

This assumption isn't claiming the universe has laws like driving on the
highway has laws. If I drive at 120mph on the interstate, I'll probably get
arrested or fined, but the car can go 120mph. But, if I try driving at
1200mph, I won't be able to do it. Even at full capacity, the engine and
drivetrain just don't have the power to make a standard sedan go that fast.
Similarly, the laws of the universe cannot be broken, not because they are
enforced by a multiversal policeman, but because they arise from the
fundamental limits of the universe itself.

On a basic level, that means the universe is constrained. We assume that the
universe is fundamentally unable to do certain things. Otherwise, laws we
assume exist wouldn't actually have any power[^1]. That's like assuming my
opponent won't use her queen in a game of chess. Nothing prevents her from
doing so, and assuming _she won't use her queen_ as a basic law is completely
unfounded. In fact, assuming something that arbitrary is bound to hurt my
chances of doing anything useful. The laws of the universe aren't arbitrary.
They obtain their power directly from the basic structure of the universe and
everything in it.

Assuming basic laws also says that poked a certain way, the universe reacts
predictably. If I toss an apple in the air, it falls back down again. If I
toss an apple in space, it floats off into the distance. We claim that the
difference isn't random, but due to the basic laws governing everything that
happens.

#### Those Laws Can be Known

The second major assumption of science is that the laws of the universe can be
known. They are not fundamentally hidden or beyond human understanding. You
might argue that the first assumption gives us this second one for free. If
the laws exist because of the nature of the universe, then simple observation
should tell us what they are. But, we can imagine a universe where
explanations exist but are unknowable. Whether or not that's the case in our
universe, I'm highlighting this second bias because it leads to several
interesting conclusions:

First, this assumption is great news for seekers of beauty and truth. Not only
is it true that everything happening in the universe can be described in a few
basic laws, but you can carry those laws in your head! You can see something
unbelievably amazing, and know fundamentally why it happened that way. You can
understand the truths of the universe on a basic level. And what's more, the
truths are not one-time, ad-hoc solutions, but deep laws undergirding
everything. The beauty and elegance of this assumption is breath-taking,
because it means not only that the truth is out there, but also that it can be
intimately known.

Second, the laws we don't know are puzzles waiting to be solved. For the
world's explorers and creators, our work is simply lying there waiting to be
discovered. The question _why?_ has an answer - we just need to find it. Until
we have every last law codified, there will be more to discover. And even
then, all we'll have are the approximate axioms of the universe. We can then
combine them to create wonders we can't even imagine now. Think of all the
marvelous creations of math, built from just a few axioms, and apply that
across the entire universe.

Third, we can use the laws to force the universe to do our bidding. Think of a
musician. The more music theory he knows and the more familiar he is with his
instrument, the more easily he can create beautiful music. He can use the
rules of music and the quirks of his instrument to entertain and delight
people. Those limitations provide a set of boundaries which can be exploited
to our benefit. In the same way, known laws of the universe can be exploited
to help us. Everything from shaving cream to central heat - even the
musician's instrument - relies on these laws to work properly. Without them,
our world would be a dark place.

#### So, What?

Everything you do and believe in as a scientist is based on these two
assumptions. Even when a project is going poorly, and you see no way forward,
you've can't conclude that it's because there is no explanation. You can't
conclude that it's because the explanation can't be known. You've got to hold
onto those assumptions. If the universe behaved randomly, or it behaved
according to fundamentally unknowable laws, science as we know it would cease
to exist[^2].

How can you explain a random universe, except to say that it's random? What
good are explanations that are intrinsically beyond us? It may be comforting
to know there are explanations, but making the explanations themselves
unknowable cripples our ability to do good in the world.

*  a painting I can't see doesn't fill me with beauty
*  a hammer I can't use doesn't help me build a house 
*  a puzzle left in the box is no fun

An explanation you don't know is all these things. Until it is made known to
us, its beauty, its fun, and its ability to do good in the world are all
hidden.

But, given these two biases, science can explore and explain with abandon. If
all of space, time, matter, and energy obey laws that can be known, we can
discover those laws and use them to build a better world. We can tease apart
the mysteries of the universe and understand it. We can discover unimaginable
elegance in biology, physics, chemistry, neuroscience, astronomy, and a
hundred other fields. We can do good by explaining the universe.

That's why these biases in particular are so important. They give us an
incredible ability to do good for the world by demanding an explanation. These
biases are the original charter of science. And, if you want to do great
science, you've got to believe beyond all doubt that the universe follows laws
and can be explained. You are staring into the unknown and calling forth
structure. If you aren't sure it's there, you won't find it.


[^1]: Even if we assume that some of the laws are probabilistic, as in quantum mechanics, the probability distribution itself provides a law which cannot be broken.
[^2]: Another reason to really understand these assumptions is that if, at some point, you give one of them up, you should probably stop doing science. If the universe is random or unknowable, our attempts to understand it are foolish.

[1]: /a/2011-02-11-when-in-doubt-demand-an-explanation/star-trail.png (Even in the toughest times, the universe has laws - photo by c@rljones on flickr.com)
[2]: http://joshrule.com/blog/science-needs-bias (WOTS - Science Needs Bias)
[3]: http://joshrule.com/blog/beeswax-brain-power-and-black-swans-the-scientific-method-explained/ (WOTS - Beeswax, Brain Power, and Black Swans: The Scientific Method Explained)
[4]: http://joshrule.com/blog/what-is-science/ (WOTS - What Is Science?)
