---
author: joshrule
date: '2011-03-25 16:59:08'
layout: post
slug: seeing-past-time-and-space-part-1
status: publish
title: Seeing Past Time and Space - Part 1
wordpress_id: '133'
categories:
- science
---

![Is this all there is? - photo by Chi King on flickr.com][1]

(Note: When writing this post, I reached a point where I realized what I was
trying to say was quite a bit more than I had time to write up. So, today
presents a major question scientists need to address. Wednesday, I'll begin
answering it.)

I love science. Centuries of active use have honed it into one of the most
effective tools we have for explaining the universe, and it has helped us ask
and answer millions of questions about our world.

Because of science, we can explain things like gravity, DNA, quantum
mechanics, and electricity. Imagine a world without science, without knowledge
of the planets whirling through the sky above us, and without a way to cure
the diseases that plague us. It would be a needlessly and pathetically
impoverished place. Science is a wonderful part of our lives. One of the best
things: we're nowhere near the end of our work. There's still so much to
explore and explain.

#### Why I really love Science

But, the main reason I love science isn't the mastery it provides or the
interesting questions it asks. It's truth. I love science because it is the
best way we have of discovering the universe we inhabit. Science helps us
understand reality so that when we act in it, we aren't acting randomly.

Without some way to knock structure into reality, it's hard to know how we
should act in it. We could muddle through things and do our best, but the very
attempt to 'do your best' wouldn't have any meaning. 'Best' would be some
random metric invented for convenience or personal gain. In a world without
structure or explanation, there is no best or worst. Any attempt to provide
one is arbitrary and random. And, randomness doesn't make for great work, a
clear signal above the noise. It just makes more noise, clanging in confusion
and pointlessly droning until its source is extinguished.

The search for truth, for understanding and an explanation, is the reason
science is so important. That's why we need scientists to explore every nook
and cranny of the universe. We need to know reality and how we fit into it.
Only then can we act in a way that makes sense. Only then can we avoid being
hopelessly random.

#### A Problem with Science

Unfortunately, science is limited. I've just said that it's a wonderful tool.
It represents the culmination of humanity's effort to understand the world it
inhabits. It's done remarkable things for us. But, its greatest strength is
also a crippling weakness.

Science depends on experiments. It demands that the scientist test whatever
they study. [I've talked about this before][2]. As important as our theories
may be, they are empty words without the experiments that support them and tie
them back to reality. When we draw new conclusions, it's only because we have
experiments to support them.

But, our ability to experiment is bound tightly to what we can experience or
build tools to experience. **Tools constrain bias, and we are our most
confining tool.** The boundaries of what we can experience are also the
boundaries of what we can test, of what we can understand and explain through
science. Our limited capacity to experience creates a science with a limited
capacity to know.

The problem deepens. Because we cannot abandon space, time, energy, or matter
for even an instant, you and I experience a thunderingly physical world. As
far as I know, we can't experience reality outside the physical. We can't jump
out of space and time to experience what, if anything, lies beyond them. We
cannot see beyond matter and energy to know if there is more to reality than
just a physical universe. Our ability to know where we sit in reality and
explain it is limited by our ability to experience it. We may not be able to
know all truth, to unravel all the laws of reality.

#### What to do about it

All is not lost, though. Science continues to do a wonderful job of describing
the physical world, and it may do an equally good job explaining non-physical
worlds if we can get a grip on these two questions: _is there reality beyond
the physical, and how can we be sure of our answer?_ and _what can science say
about this reality, if it exists?_

That's what I'll be looking at in depth on Wednesday.

[1]: /a/2011-03-25-seeing-past-time-and-space-part-1/mountain-side.png (Is this all there is? - photo by Chi King on flickr.com)
[2]: http://joshrule.com/blog/beeswax-brain-power-and-black-swans-the-scientific-method-explained/ (WOTS - Beeswax, Brain Power, and Black Swans: The Scientific Method Explained)
