---
author: joshrule
date: '2011-01-06 16:42:16'
layout: post
slug: what-is-science
status: publish
title: What is Science?
wordpress_id: '85'
categories:
- science
---

![science studies everything - by NASA Goddard Photo and Video on
flickr.com][1]

Today, I'm starting a new series to ask some very basic questions about
science. And, I'm kicking this series off with probably the most basic
question we can ask about science: what is it?

#### Two Disclaimers

I won't be covering the scientific method today. It's hugely important, but
it's actually a step beyond this article. I want to think about an even more
basic question: "What is science?" Once we understand that, the actual tools
we've developed to do science will make a lot more sense.

Also, I'm not going to give a bullet-proof answer that remains unassailable
from all vantages. If you are looking to pick a fight and split some semantic
hairs, I'm sure you'll find places to do it in my definition. If you push too
hard, [language collapses][2]. All I'm trying to do is explore the basic
identity and motivation of science. I want to know what it is we're actually
shooting for in our attempts to do great science.

#### Science tries to Explain

Perhaps the first thing that comes to mind when I think about science are the
various branches of science like physics, chemistry, neuroscience and so on.
Each of these branches studies some particular facet of the universe, and
there seems to be a branch for nearly every imaginable subject. There are
people who study plants, animals, minerals, the atmosphere, and a million
other things. Scientists even study things which seem ephemeral and lost to
the depths of time. For example, cosmologists, paleontologists, and
archaeologists work to piece together the distant past, and meteorologists and
seismologists work to draw conclusions about our near future. Some theoretical
physicists even study the possibility that our universe is part of a vast
network of other universes that we have never even seen. Together, these
branches of science seem to cover just about every conceivable topic.

But, science isn't any of these branches, nor even their sum total. It's not a
bear, a star, or a chemical reaction. It's not even the entire universe or
multiverse. It's not a particular thing that you can pick out and wrap your
arms around. Instead, science is the study of all these things. It's a way of
trying to explain how everything in the universe works and relates to
everything else. If the universe is a giant machine, science is the attempt to
reverse-engineer that machine.

But, science is a very particular type of reverse-engineering. Scientists
aren't looking just for surface-level descriptions of the things they study.
They want deep, theoretical, fundamental descriptions of everything. The
surface-level descriptions can be useful in normal conversation, but science
ultimately wants to explain the entire universe in terms of its most basic
building blocks. Science provides powerful explanations for the operation of
the entire universe.

But, it's not just any deep explanation that science allows as a valid
description of some phenomenon. Science only allows the best explanation. For
scientists, that typically means the explanation which matches the evidence of
reality better than any other explanation. That is, given all the possible
explanations for something, science selects the one which is most likely given
all relevant evidence. Over the last couple of decades, the study of [Bayesian
probability theory][3] has become increasingly important for scientists,
because it gives us a powerful way to describe the types of probabilities
needed for these calculations. I'll talk much more about this sort of
probability in an upcoming post.

Because science explains the universe we experience, it's an inductive
discipline. That is, we don't have a perfect set of axioms from which we can
deduce everything there is to know about the universe. Instead, all the
conclusions of science are based on the best evidence we have so far. The
theory of gravity works pretty well, but there's nothing written in the sky
requiring it to exist. If we woke up tomorrow without gravity, we wouldn't
have recourse to demand that it come back. We'd simply know that our theory of
gravity was incomplete.

Most scientists don't worry much about losing gravity, because they assume
that tomorrow will be a lot like today, which is pretty similar to yesterday.
Without that assumption, induction doesn't work very well. And without
induction, science as we know it doesn't make much sense.

Because science is inductive rather than deductive, the acceptance or
rejection of a scientific theory isn't governed as much by truth or falsehood
as by its probability of truth or falsehood. But, nailing down even those
probabilities can be tricky because there is so much we don't know and so few
explanations that we've actually considered. So, we set out several heuristics
as to what is generally true about our best explanations.

#### Heuristics in Science

These heuristics themselves don't make theories more or less likely to be
true, but many of our most likely theories share these traits. So, we assume
that most good theories probably share them.

One heuristic is Occam's Razor, which calls for explanations to be as simple
as possible without sacrificing too much explanatory power. For example, if
you claimed that blankets kept you warm at night because they trapped warm air
close to you and they were empowered by benign trans-dimensional beings of
fire, Occam's Razor dictates that unless you have a very good reason, you cut
out the part about beings of fire. You have great evidence for the body heat
argument and no evidence for the beings of fire. So, that part doesn't add
explanatory power, but it does needlessly complicate things.

Another strong heuristic is that good explanations tend to make good
predictions. As I said earlier, science relies on induction, which relies on
the world remaining similar, or at least changing at a predictable rate. So,
good explanations for a certain phenomenon should be able to predict how a
similar phenomenon occurs tomorrow. Or, we should be able to set up a
phenomenon which is similar to one we've seen before except for one key
difference, and be able to predict how that difference will change the result.
So, the better an explanation, the more accurately it will predict a
particular phenomenon, and the more particular phenomena it can predict
accurately[^1].

The few exceptions to the vast coverage of science are things we can't show
more or less likely by experience. For example, take the existence of those
beings of fire we thought kept our blankets warm at night. Because these
beings aren't subject to the laws of the universe as we understand them, we
can't test their existence. One of the key tenets of science, though, is that
every conclusion ascribed to science be justifiably more likely than the other
possible conclusions. For science to weigh in on whether there are trans-
dimensional beings of fire, there must be some sort of test that makes their
existence more or less likely. Unless they change this world in some reliable
way, any explanation we have won't be any more likely than any other. In that
case, science has nothing to say about these beings.

One of the more interesting things about science, though, is the inventiveness
of its practitioners. Many of the subjects science now studies were once
thought to be impossible or heretical to study. Things like astronomy,
psychology, and anatomy weren't part of science at all. But, because
scientists were eager to know about these subjects, they began to look for
ways to test them. Eventually, they found some, and new fields of science were
born. So, many of the fields which now seem untestable may, given enough time
and thought, become easily testable.

#### So, What Is Science?

With all that, the definition of science that seems to fit best is the
following:

**Science is an attempt to provide the most likely explanation of everything.**

Today's been a whirlwind tour, and I've left a lot unsaid. I haven't even
started talking about why you or I might want to do science in the first
place. Over the next few months, we'll continue to unpack this definition and
explore more about what science is and how we can learn to think like
scientists. Monday, I'll post an update on my current 30-day trial to take at
least 15 minutes of pure thinking time every day.

Thanks for reading, and have a great day.


[^1]: The desire for very good predictions is one reason math is so important in science. It allows to state things much more precisely and densely than is possible in natural language.

[1]: /a/2011-01-06-what-is-science/everything.png (science studies everything - by NASA Goddard Photo and Video on flickr.com)
[2]: http://paulgraham.com/philosophy.html (Paul Graham - How to Do Philosophy)
[3]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayesian_probability (Wikipedia - Bayesian Probability)
