---
author: joshrule
date: '2011-04-13 20:19:21'
layout: post
slug: the-humble-scientist
status: publish
title: The Humble Scientist
wordpress_id: '144'
categories:
- science
---

![Our experience is limited. We haven't even explored our entire ocean yet! -
photo by akabilk on flickr.com][1]

My last three posts grew out of the idea that our bodies strongly bias our
thoughts. In fact, I proposed that our bodies push us to consider mostly, even
exclusively, the physical world, disregarding good evidence for the non-
physical. But, the non-physical isn't all we discover when examining our
innate biases. Today, you'll also see how your body encourages profound
humility in the pursuit of great science.

#### The Problem of Limited Experience

Humans are severely limited. Our experiences are of a very restricted sort,
even when bolstered by the full range of tools at our disposal. Don't get me
wrong - our naked perceptions are breath-taking and our tools are impressive
and helpful nearly beyond belief. But, don't kid yourself - human experience
to date is just a small part of the space of possible experiences in reality.
We haven't even explored the bottom of our own oceans or the depths of our own
minds, much less the outer reaches of experience!

What's more, the tools actually available to any one person are frighteningly
few. I may know a few things about programming, discrete mathematics, and
fMRI, but I know almost nothing of ironwork, analytical chemistry, or musical
composition. If you actually wrote down the tools I've mastered, the list
would be embarrassingly short. It's not that I'm unusually under-accomplished
. It's just that most of us have focused on honing a few skills and (perhaps
foolishly) ignored nearly everything else.

These limits are especially acute for those of us just starting into science.
Just think about how hard it is to tell good research from bad. Despite all
our limitations, we must still find some way to explore the unknown and come
back to the rest of the world with better explanations than anyone's ever had.

Instead of pretending that we're limitless and infallible, we should accept
our finiteness and leverage that acceptance to do better science. We do so
primarily in two ways.

#### We Rely on Others

I've often tried to pretend that I know more than I do, and every time, I come
away from the experience with a new scar, promising myself not to make the
same mistake again. I've made and broken that promise several times. Why?
Pride. I don't like letting people see that my knowledge and experience are
limited and that I'm not doing once-in-a-lifetime work yet. Even when it's
painfully obvious that I'm totally new to neuroscience and have just a
rudimentary grasp of the central themes, major schools of thought, and common
tools, I still want to seem like I know more than I do. That's a mistake. You
must admit your shortcomings before you can fix them and produce useful work.
Until then, you just look like a blustering fool.

One of the first things we must learn on the road to great science is that we
are not self-sufficient. Other people developed the field you are stepping
into, or at the very least, they developed the fields on which your work
builds. They wrote the papers you are reading, and they built the tools you'll
need to understand your work. You'd still be hitting a few rocks together and
throwing wooden spears without the vast support of scientists past and
present.

So, learn to rely on those people. Ask questions, build relationships, and
focus on doing great science, not on working alone. When you put great science
and working alone next to each other, it makes no sense that we compare them
in our heads, but we do. We often think that if we rely on someone else for
help, the result is not as impressive. That's wrong. So, ditch the ego, and
learn to value science itself more highly than your reputation or paper count.
Do science because the world needs truth and understanding, not because you
need some limelight and press interviews. There are far easier ways to become
famous, anyway.

Pursuing great work isn't a complicated idea, but we can easily confuse
ourselves with it. For example, One of Larry Wall's three virtues for
programmers is hubris, the sort of pride that drives us to do work others
won't want to say bad things about[^1]. Certainly, Wall's virtues are
tongue-in-cheek, but the idea of working hard so others don't bad-mouth our
work gets things wrong in the same way that working alone does. We shouldn't
do good work for the sake of our reputation. We should do good work because
the result itself is valuable. We should be so enthralled by the framing of
good questions and the crafting of elegant solutions that our very desire for
understanding drives our excellence.

#### We Rely on Reality

More profoundly, we must learn to depend on reality being a better judge of
truth than we are. We must recognize that at the end of the day, gravity
exists, no matter how much we may believe otherwise. Neither you nor I decide
how reality is shaped. As scientists, we simply work to understand and explain
it.

That seems straightforward, but the deeper implication is that reality has the
final word. You don't get to mold reality to your pet theories. If the data
don't fit your explanation, you've got either a bad experiment or a bad
explanation, but you don't have a bad reality. Finding the right explanation
will inevitably require serious reflection, the sort that soaks in the same
critical data for days on end, seeking the understanding behind the facts.
You've got to shape your explanations to fit reality, because reality
certainly doesn't have to shape itself to fit your explanations.

Ultimately, science requires a humility which says that you might be wrong in
an important way, and that no matter how difficult it is, you're more
concerned with the right explanation than the easy one. You've got to be more
enamored with the truth than with your own ego and ideas. It's a tough pill to
swallow, but a necessary one.

#### Science or Selfishness

Science embraces the idea that discovering truth is more important than
personal fame, riches, or pride. So, I'm asking, _the next time some strange
data or difficult question comes your way, how will you respond?_ Will you
languish for months answering a question when involving your fellow scientists
may have resolved it quickly? Will you ignore odd results or pursue them? Will
you humble yourself enough to actually do science, or will you just stroke
your ego and play games with test tubes and telescopes?


[^1]: Although designed for programmers, the _Three Virtues_ apply equally well to scientists.

[1]: /a/2011-04-13-the-humble-scientist/ocean1.png (Our experience is limited. We haven't even explored our entire ocean yet! - photo by akabilk on flickr.com)
