---
author: joshrule
date: '2011-01-13 18:40:37'
layout: post
slug: why-do-science
status: publish
title: Why do Science?
wordpress_id: '89'
categories:
- science
---

![Even if I collected garbage, I'd still be a scientist - photo by Editor B on
flickr.com][1]

Last week, I outlined to the best of my knowledge [what science is][2], but I
left a few hundred other questions about science unanswered. Today, I'm going
to start taking a stab at one of them: given what science is, why would anyone
want to do it?

I started writing this post as an overview of the reasons some undefined
person might want to study science. But, I'm sure you and I both are smart
enough to come up with a few reasons some abstract Joe or Jane might do
science. And, if you're reading this blog, chances are something has already
motivated you to pursue science, even if you haven't explicitly thought it
through.

So, what follows are a few of the reasons I decided to start studying science.
I hope a few of them apply to you, and that what I write might make your own
motivations a bit clearer.

#### Well, Duh

One reason I'm drawn to science is that I _simply want to know_. This reason
is among the easiest to claim because it doesn't require much thought on my
part. If science is an attempt to find the most likely explanations for
things, then of course I do science because I want to know those explanations.
Otherwise, I'd run away from science with all possible haste or, at the very
least, ignore it.

The real question is, why do I want to know?

#### Thrill of the Hunt

Some people are problem solvers by nature. They have trouble sleeping if they
haven't worked on an interesting problem during the day. And if they have,
they still have trouble sleeping because they're working through the problem
in their heads as they lay there. These sorts of problem solvers are
absolutely thrilled by the hunt for solutions to interesting problems. I am
one of these people. Whether I'm building something, tearing it apart, or
discovering something totally new, I love solving problems.

The world is filled with problems; many of them involve explaining the way
things work. And, it seems like we're nowhere close to explaining everything.
A constant and unending stream of interesting problems with potentially useful
solutions makes science look very attractive.

I sometimes frustrate people because I'm constantly interested in knowing the
_why?_ and _how?_ behind something, no matter what it is. I'm usually
interested in the details and can't stop until I understand the most basic
pieces of a system. It sometimes seems like that desire is itself a basic part
of me, but I suspect it probably stems from some desire to make the world work
exactly the way I want it to. In any case, I like doing science because it's
an elegant way to answer these sorts of questions, and the answers have
potentially huge implications.

#### What Else Is There?

Another reason I started doing science is because it seems like the only clear
way to think. A lot of people also become poets for this reason, and I
sympathize with them, too. In any case, I'm becoming a scientist because I can
hardly imagine being anything else. If I tried to be a garbage collector, I'd
be a scientist who just happens to collect garbage on the side. The mindset of
science seems like the only honest way of looking at the world. I'm out to
know the truth, and if science works to discover the things which are most
likely to be true, it seems like a good way to go.

One thing I have to constantly remind myself, though, is that science is done
by people and is often poorly biased, unclearly communicated, or just plain
ill-thought out. So, while the aim of science is a noble one, we often drag
our feet on the way there. That's no less reason to do it, just a word of
caution to keep us from becoming discouraged.

#### Become a Better Person

I also do science to become a better person. That may sound a bit soft, but I
mean it in all seriousness. Science can help remove bad biases from our
thinking and introduce good ones. The knowledge science provides can help us
make better choices. And, science can help us learn to think more clearly and
accurately because it forces us to repeatedly confront the unknown, and win.
In short, science can help us live in greater alignment with the truth. If
that's not a desirable thing, I'd be hard pressed to find something that is.

And, I'm in science for the sheer wonder it gives me. My pulse races every
time the implication of a new discovery presses in on me. Trying to understand
the complexity of the brain which quietly hums along in my skull all day,
every day, overwhelms me with joy-filled awe. Science helps me feel alive and
aware of the wondrous universe we live in. One of my favorite proverbs from
King Solomon is that _It is the glory of God to conceal things, but the glory
of kings is to search things out_. That idea adds a certain poetry to being a
scientist, that somehow, we are kings for searching out the mysteries of the
universe. I love that feeling, so I keep doing science.

#### To Help Others

The potential for a better world is also a major motivator for my science. I
want to help people and build a cleaner, safer planet. Science is one of the
best ways I know to do it.

Science is one way we can rid the world of false thinking, which I see as a
moral evil. I want people to be enamored with the truth, and I try very hard
to love the truth myself. Some days, I'm better than others. One quote I've
been pondering recently came to me from [P.C. Hodgell][3] through [Eliezer
Yudkowsky][4]. _That which can be destroyed by the truth, should be._ We've
got to let the truth alone stand. Lies are an evil thing which keep us from
being what we are designed to be.

Also, I know that science has helped us to destroy some terrible dangers.
We've been able to eliminate diseases, increase lifespans, obliterate a great
deal of infant mortality, improve an average person's wealth and health by at
least an order of magnitude, and do so many other things through science.
Especially as someone living in a developed nation, the resources at my
fingertips are stupidly abundant. From education to savings to food to green
space to cultural enrichment, I am surrounded by good things.

And, I cannot help but feel that these things would be wasted if I didn't use
them to make this world better for everyone else, too. Science is one of the
few ways I know to reliably and dramatically improve people's lives. Helping
the mind and the spirit is, in the long-run, more important and something I
support heavily, but we cannot help people who have already died. So, I study
science in part to help this world become a better place. Sometimes, all it
takes is the extension of decades-old science in just the right direction to
open up a new world for billions of people.

#### Does That Help?

Some people simply stumble into science and are happy there. But, I'm not
really that kind of person. I like understanding why I'm doing what I'm doing.
I hope that what I've shared helps you understand why you're pursuing science
more clearly, or at least give you a reason to think about it. This kind of
internal compulsion or desire to begin studying science is key. It is the seed
for [passion][5], which over time is one of the main determinants of our
overall effectiveness as scientists, and as people generally. People with a
vision, with a purpose behind their action, typically do greater work than
those who simply float along from interest to interest.

So, pursue science because it makes you, me, and the world a better place.
Pursue it to discover and spread truth so that falsehood and lies disappear.
Pursue it for knowledge and the power that knowledge gives us over the
unknown. No matter why you do it, study science for a reason.

[1]: /a/2011-01-13-why-do-science/garbage.png (Even if I collected garbage, I'd still be a scientist - photo by Editor B on flickr.com)
[2]: http://joshrule.com/blog/what-is-science/ (WOTS - What is Science?)
[3]: http://www.pchodgell.com/site (P.C. Hodgell)
[4]: http://yudkowsky.net (Eliezer Yudkowsky)
[5]: http://joshrule.com/blog/passion-properly/ (WOTS - Passion Properly)
